If Andrew Potter’s McGill resignation resulted from political 
pressure, that would be outrageous 
PETER LOEWEN, SPECIAL TO NATIONAL POST | March 23, 2017 7:20 PM ET 
Andrew Potter has resigned as the Director of the McGill Institute for the Study of Canada. This 
is a shame. 
Were Andrew not a friend of mine, I would hold the same opinion. 
To begin, two questions: Was his resignation demanded by the Principal of McGill? Second, did 
the principal receive calls demanding his resignation from senior politicians, including those 
who saw fit to criticize Potter publicly? If so, this is outrageous. It seems to me that the correct 
response of a university leader who receives such a call would be to politely end the 
conversation. And having received such a call, interference from politicians should end virtually 
any consideration of firing. It should not make it more likely. 
I do not know if such calls were made — on Thursday McGill offered a National Post reporter 
making those inquiries no more than the short public statement they’d released that morning 
announcing the change in Andrew’s employment and saying there would be no further 
comment — but the question should be put to those political actors who saw fit to criticize 
Potter publicly. Did they take their criticism further than public? 
All McGill faculty should reflect on what happened Thursday. Do they feel more or less secure 
to do their work today? Do they feel more or less secure in their rights to criticize the 
government? Do they feel more enabled to take positions which are controversial and perhaps 
wrong, but to submit them to public comment and scrutiny nonetheless? Or do they feel that 
they should check themselves? 
For the record, I think Andrew’s column was sloppy, careless, and unconvincing. But I also think 
that characterizes a large share of academic work, including that which I regularly review for 
journals. 
I thought apologizing was the right thing to do, precisely because Andrew realized he was 
wrong and especially because he caused offence. To be wrong and to hurt people in the process 
is a risk academics take. We have to bear the consequences. The consequences are that we 
have to admit we are wrong and commit to not making the mistake in the future. There is 
shame in being in that position. That’s the cost. But the response shouldn’t be firing. That 
generates caution and kowtowing. It will invite a less intelligent and less democratic society.
If Potter were pushed out, I can imagine the defences that will be offered. First, that his article 
was not published in an academic outlet. Second, that he was only pushed out of an 
administrative, and not an academic role. 
These are bad arguments. On the first: if we only extend the protections of academic freedom 
to peer-reviewed claims, then we invite three bad outcomes. First, faculty will be reluctant to 
share their knowledge. It will remain in gated and inaccessible academic journals. Second, 
they’ll be less likely to engage in public debate, for fear of saying something wrong and now 
unprotected. Third, absent this opportunity, even their basic research will move farther away 
from questions of public interest. We all lose under this scenario. Universities desperate for 
public relevance lose especially. 
On the second objection: it’s silly. Academic roles have many components. Administrative 
service is almost always one of them. Sometimes this is weighted up in an official role. Other 
times, it comes through committee work you do as a regular faculty member. Academics must 
always do this ethically and responsibly. But managerial responsibility and accountability is 
different than holding an opinion. To fire an academic from a position because they hold (or 
offered) a controversial opinion is a signal to all ambitious academics that they should always 
play it safe. Take no risks. Straight down the middle. Say nothing controversial. Do nothing 
interesting. 
If you want universities filled only with views acceptable to everyone (or worse, to a self-
appointed censor), go ahead. They’ll be uninteresting and not worth a damn. They’ll be like a 
bad Twitter feed: no humour, no insight, just affirmations of bias and stale, anodyne snark. 
Of late, I’ve had a great collaboration with Andrew. As it happens, just this week McGill-
Queen’s University Press released a book I co-edited with Andrew and Daniel Weinstock on 
electoral reform. Given the government cancelling the reform process (a good thing), the book 
is now already outdated (a bad thing). But the thing I’m very proud of is the content of the book 
and how it was brought together. 
Andrew had the idea to hold two conferences this fall, to ask leading academics to draft short 
and pointed chapters on changing how we vote. He convinced a publisher to get the book out 
and into press in three months. This is lightning speed in the academic world, and it reflects the 
kind of work Andrew was pushing at MISC. Academically centred but publicly engaged. 
Relevant. In the arena. 
In addition to this, he convened a major conference on diversity in Canada. The keynotes are 
available online and they’re well worth watching, because they feature politicians actually 
saying provocative and important things. 
He was, for a person less than a year in the job, having fantastic success. 
In my estimation, MISC was returning to its rightful status as a leading place for Canadian 
Studies and with a flair for public engagement. Andrew’s op-ed would have set that work back a
bit, but not irreparably. Indeed, his humility and grace in recent days suggests he would have 
mended fences just fine. 
With the right signal from university leadership and with sufficient self-regard, academics can 
learn to move beyond their differences and to allow for mistakes. But that process has been 
short-circuited at McGill. 
Andrew will bounce back. I wish MISC well. I am not sure it will come back from this. And I wish 
McGill well. For such a thing to lead to a resignation it’s obvious the university is under 
incredible pressure. 
I am not sure a university can properly and optimally function under such pressure. No amount 
of federal or provincial money can make up for faculty who feel they have to constantly look 
over their shoulders. And no amount of backroom support for a principal can make up for losing 
the confidence of faculty. 
Peter Loewen is the Director of the School of Public Policy and Governance and an Associate 
Professor of Political Science at the University of Toronto.