Director of McGill Institute for the Study of Canada steps down 
after publishing column critical of Quebec, and many raise 
questions about academic freedom. 
Elizabeth Redden 
March 24, 2017 
The director of McGill University’s Institute for the Study of Canada has resigned from his post 
after a magazine column he wrote about "social malaise" in Quebec came under heavy 
criticism, including from the province’s premier. 
In announcing his resignation on social media, Andrew Potter, a former newspaper editor with 
a Ph.D. in philosophy from the University of Toronto, cited “the ongoing negative reaction 
within the university community and the broader public to my column” as the reason. He has 
apologized for aspects of the column. 
View image on Twitter
Follow
Andrew Potter 
✔@jandrewpotter
Because I can't figure out Facebook, here's my resignation statement: 
10:55 AM - 23 Mar 2017 
“This has been the dream job of a lifetime, but I have come to the conclusion that the credibility 
of the institute will be best served by my resignation,” Potter wrote. He will continue in his 
position as an associate professor in the Faculty of Arts at McGill, one of Canada's leading 
universities. 
News about Potter's resignation immediately raised speculation about whether Potter was 
pushed out and concerns about academic freedom at McGill -- concerns that the university's 
leader described as "unfounded." The university was, however, quick to disassociate itself from 
Potter's piece. 
Potter did not respond to Inside Higher Ed's request for an interview. The Canadian news 
magazine Maclean’s, which published Potter's offending column, cited unnamed sources saying 
that "McGill endured such intense backlash over Potter’s Maclean’s piece that the university 
left him only two choices: resign or be fired." 
“If it is true that the McGill administration bowed to external pressure and forced Professor 
Potter to step down, then this would be one of the most serious violations of academic 
freedom in recent years,” David Robinson, the executive director of the Canadian Association of 
University Teachers, said in a statement. “Universities have an absolute obligation to protect 
and defend the academic freedom of their faculty from outside influences.” 
In a public message, McGill's principal and vice chancellor (the equivalent of president), 
Suzanne Fortier, said the board of the institute accepted Potter's resignation "regretfully." She 
wrote that Potter's "resignation provoked unfounded rumors and concerns regarding academic 
freedom," which she described as a "foundational principle" for the university. 
"The mission of MISC is to promote a better understanding of Canada through the study of our 
heritage and to support the study of Canada across the country and internationally," Fortier 
wrote. "Professor Potter recognized that he had failed to uphold this mission and that the 
'credibility of the institute would be best served by his resignation.'" 
A McGill spokesman said that Fortier would not be granting interviews and declined to answer 
questions beyond published statements from Fortier and the institute. 
Potter's controversial Maclean's column, which was published Monday, offers a dim view of 
Quebec's society as lacking in social cohesion. Potter takes as his starting point for the piece the 
stranding of hundreds of cars on a Montreal highway during a snowstorm last week and argues 
that the stranding "reveals the essential malaise eating away at the foundations of Quebec 
society."
In making the case that, compared to the rest of Canada, "Quebec is an almost pathologically 
alienated and low-trust society, deficient in many of the most basic forms of social capital that 
other Canadians take for granted," Potter cites statistics related to volunteerism rates, civic 
engagement and social isolation; discusses the scale of the province's underground, cash-only 
economy; and describes the lack of "proper" uniforms worn by protesting police officers and 
the "on strike" stickers plastered on Quebec's emergency response vehicles as having a 
corroding effect on public trust in institutions. 
Potter has apologized for parts of the column, saying in his resignation statement that “I deeply 
regret many aspects” of it, including “its sloppy use of anecdotes, its tone and the way it comes 
across as deeply critical of the entire province.” 
He previously issued an apology for what he described as “rhetorical flourishes that go beyond 
what is warranted by either the facts or my own beliefs," according to the Montreal Gazette, 
which quoted from the earlier apology statement. Maclean's also issued two factual 
corrections. 
"I think the op-ed itself was poorly executed, but that’s beside the point, because academic 
freedom also means that researchers can be wrong," said Emmett Macfarlane, an assistant 
professor of political science at the University of Waterloo. "The proper forum for correcting 
errors is in scholarly or public debate, and that actually happened in this instance. But then 
suddenly he’s issuing a resignation. I think that’s a huge failure on the part of McGill 
administration." 
Macfarlane wrote a piece that appeared in Maclean's characterizing a McGill University tweet 
distancing itself from Potter's views as "chilling." The tweet, below, was issued by the 
university's official account on Tuesday, prior to Potter's resignation.
Follow
McGill University 
✔@mcgillu 
The views expressed by @JAndrewPotter in the @MacleansMag article do not represent those 
of #McGill. 
2:54 PM - 21 Mar 2017 
“I think it's an outrage," Macfarlane said Thursday of Potter's resignation. "I think this is a real 
scandal for McGill University, which has completely failed to protect its core academic mission 
and the principle of academic freedom.” 
“Mr. Potter has been undoubtedly pressured at the very least to resign following the 
articulation of an unpopular and controversial argument in the public sphere,” Macfarlane said.
“Academic freedom is expressly there to protect against that. Our ability to learn, to create 
knowledge as researchers, depends on our ability to examine things from a minority 
perspective, from an unpopular or outside-the-mainstream position. To have effectively 
sanctioned a scholar at their university for writing an op-ed that outraged people, that created 
obvious political pressure on the university, is an overt failure and violation of that principle.” 
Michael Byers, the Canada Research Chair in Global Politics and International Law at the 
University of British Columbia, also criticized McGill's response in an op-ed in The Globe and 
Mail. "First, they publicly stated that Mr. Potter’s views did not represent the university’s views. 
But great universities do not have views. Instead, they provide a venue -- safe from prejudice 
and persecution -- in which intellectuals, including students, can gather to develop, debate and 
express knowledge, insights and opinions," Byers wrote. 
"Second, by stating that Mr. Potter’s views did not represent McGill’s views, the administrators 
were implicitly criticizing him, at a time when he was already under intense public pressure to 
retract his column and apologize. A great university would have rushed to support his right to 
speak," Byers continued. 
"Third, McGill allowed the controversy to become a resigning matter, thus turning a bad 
mistake into a scar on its reputation. The scar will be larger if it turns out that senior 
administrators pressured Mr. Potter into resigning. If they themselves succumbed to pressure 
from politicians or donors, the damage could be crippling." 
Terry Hébert, the president of the McGill Association of University Teachers and a professor in 
the department of pharmacology and therapeutics, said that while he does not know the 
details of what happened, he is saddened that Potter resigned -- and he would be angered if he 
found out university administrators encouraged or compelled him to. 
“I don’t know what to make of his resignation,” Hébert said. “I’ve asked people in the university 
if he was fired or encouraged to resign; the one person that I spoke with said no.” That person 
is highly placed, Hébert said, “but they’re not right at the top and they probably don’t hear 
every discussion. I’ve asked the principal and the provost and I haven’t heard from them, 
either. I think they’re just hoping this whole thing will blow over.” 
“I would have thought the apology would have been sufficient, but I don’t know him. I don’t 
know how much self-regret there was there and how much he thought that this compromised 
his ability to do his job as the head of the institute. Only he knows that,” Hébert said. 
A petition on Change.org that originally called for Potter's firing -- which only received 24 
signatures -- argued that his apology was insufficient given his role as director of an institute 
focused on the study of Canada. "We call on Principal Suzanne Fortier and the McGill Board of 
Governors to acknowledge that an institute with the mission of promoting understanding of 
Canada's pluralistic society and values cannot have a director who demonstrates prejudiced 
opinions and sloppy academic rigor in his approach to public dialogue and commentary," the
petition states. "The public attention that this incident has received will ultimately tarnish the 
reputation of the institute unless further action is taken." 
Potter's column had come under fire from, among others, the province's highest political figure. 
Quebec's premier, Philippe Couillard, described it to reporters as "an article of very poor 
quality," according to the CBC. 
"It aims to paint a negative portrait of Quebec, based on prejudices," Couillard reportedly said. 
Potter came to McGill for what was to be a three-year term directing the institute in August 
2016. A university announcement about his hiring cited his "reputation as a public intellectual 
in Canada and his experience as an editor at a major metropolitan newspaper," The Ottawa 
Citizen. 
The university press release about Potter's hiring describes the institute's programs as follows: 
"The institute runs an academic program at McGill, supports an active research environment 
and organizes a variety of large-scale, public events on matters of interest to Canadians. These 
include MISC's annual conferences, which attract a great deal of attention from policy makers, 
media and the general public. While the institute itself is nonpartisan, MISC is no stranger to 
debate and controversy." 
Read more by 
Elizabeth Redden