Board of Directors 
Mark Mercer, Ph.D. (Saint Mary’s) 
President 
Janice Fiamengo, Ph.D. (Ottawa) 
Tom Flanagan, Ph.D. FRSC (Calgary) 
Andrew Irvine, Ph.D. (UBC) 
Steve Lupker, Ph.D. (UWO) 
John Mueller, Ph.D. (Calgary) 
Clive Seligman, Ph.D. (Western) 
Peter Suedfeld, Ph.D. FRSC (UBC) 
 Past Presidents 
Clive Seligman, Ph.D. (Western) 
Doreen Kimura, Ph.D. FRSC (SFU) 
John J. Furedy, Ph.D. (Toronto)
27 March 2017 
Suzanne Fortier 
Principal and Vice-Chancellor 
McGill University 
Room 506, James Admin. Bldg. 
845 Sherbrooke Street West 
Montreal, Quebec H3A 0G4 
Dear Dr. Fortier, 
I am writing as president of the Society for Academic Freedom and 
Scholarship (SAFS), a national organization of university faculty members 
and others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and reasoned and 
respectful debate. (For further information, please see our website at 
Our Society is concerned about the implications for academic freedom of 
McGill’s decision to distance itself publicly from the opinions McGill 
professor Andrew Potter expressed in Maclean’s magazine. 
As you know, on Tuesday 21 March, McGill posted on its official Twitter 
account a statement that read “The views expressed by @JAndrewPotter in 
the @MacleansMag article do not represent those of #McGill.” This 
statement was in response to Professor Potter’s article “How a snowstorm 
exposed Quebec’s real problem: social malaise.”
While we recognize that those holding administrative appointments within a 
university often need to indicate to their readers that they are not writing on 
behalf of their institution, universities can encourage candid and searching 
discussion and debate only if they neither penalize nor reward members of their community for 
the positions they. Members of a university community should feel themselves free to accept 
or reject any idea solely on its merits, and not because it comports with prescribed views. With 
that tweet, however, McGill signaled that the opinions Dr Potter expressed are inappropriate or 
unwelcome. Such a signal can cause members of the community, especially students and 
junior professors, to refrain from saying what is on their minds or to pretend to accept views 
that they do not in fact hold.
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3L 4T6, Canada; e-mail: 
To date, McGill has not commented on that tweet. We would like to know whether the 
university will withdraw it and apologize to the McGill community for interfering in the free 
flow of ideas and discussion. 
We wish to emphasize the importance of this matter. It is conceivable that McGill’s official 
repudiation of Dr Potter’s article played a role in Dr Potter’s decision to resign as the director 
of the McGill Institute for the Study of Canada. The impression that it did will certainly stifle 
inquiry and discussion at McGill. Only by acknowledging the mistake the university made by 
trying to distance itself from one of its professor’s articles can McGill begin to regain the trust 
of students and scholars. 
SAFS looks forward to hearing from you. We will post this letter on our website. With your 
permission, we will be pleased to post your reply together with it. 
Yours sincerely,
Mark Mercer, PhD 
President, Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) 
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre 
Halifax, NS B3L 4T6 
Professor and Chair, Department of Philosophy 
Saint Mary’s University 
923 Robie Street 
Halifax, NS B3H 3C3 
Cc: Christopher P. Manfredi, Provost and Vice-Principal (Academic) 
Michael Meighen, Chancellor