The chilling effect of a McGill University tweet on its scholars
University of Waterloo professor Emmett Macfarlane on why McGill’s public distancing of itself 
from a scholar is a problem 
Emmett Macfarlane 
March 22, 2017 
Controversy erupted over an opinion piece authored by Andrew Potter, director of the McGill 
Institute for the Study of Canada, published on the Maclean’s website Monday. Potter 
connected a winter storm stranding hundreds of commuters on a Montreal highway to what he 
argued was the “almost pathologically alienated and low-trust society” in Quebec. The next 
day, Potter posted an apology on Facebook, stating that he went too far in some of his analysis 
and that he extrapolated too much from personal anecdotes with respect to some of his claims. 
But the real scandal came at about the same time, in the form of a statement from McGill 
University’s official Twitter account that distanced the university from Potter’s op-ed. “The 
views expressed by @JAndrewPotter in the @MacleansMag article do not represent those of 
#McGill,” it read. 
This may seem, on the surface, a relatively innocuous statement. But it is in fact a reprehensible 
attack on the core of the academic mission, and specifically on academic freedom. 
Academic freedom ensures that scholars and researchers can teach and communicate ideas 
free from fear that they might face sanction from outside interests and, perhaps especially, 
their own institutions. The concept is only useful if it protects research and ideas that are 
controversial, obscure, or otherwise unpopular in order to guarantee the pursuit of curiosity-
generated knowledge and learning, as well as bringing the benefits of novel (dare I say 
“innovative?”) thinking. 
A university publicly disassociating itself from the specific ideas disseminated by one of its 
scholars may seem like a rote public relations maneuver. It is easy to see why McGill’s 
administration might adopt the politician-like tactic; Potter’s column was deemed insulting and 
offensive by some in Quebec, and the last thing the university needs in today’s climate is a dent 
in its alumni donations or, worse still, an excuse for hostility from the provincial government. 
By thinking like a crisis management team instead of a university, however, McGill lost sight of 
the core principles by which it ought to be governed. It doesn’t matter whether Potter was 
wrong or “offensive”—indeed, getting things wrong is a key part of any meaningful scientific or 
knowledge-creating pursuit. Nor does it even matter that Potter issued an apology for parts of 
his piece. It is simply not the place of his university to issue a statement disavowing itself from 
his opinion.
Here’s the real problem: the statement creates a potential chilling effect for scholars at McGill, 
particularly pre-tenure, contract, or “sessional” researchers and instructors who do not enjoy 
the protections of tenure. They may now rightly fear that offending the wrong people via the 
pursuit of certain types of research or the dissemination of unpopular ideas will lead to a public 
slap on the wrist, or worse, negative consequences for tenure or promotion. The issue extends 
beyond Potter or this one op-ed. 
In light of this, a number of important questions need to be considered. Who is responsible for 
the university’s statement about Potter’s op-ed? It is highly unlikely that this was a proactive 
tweet by the communications staff; it almost certainly came from someone in the senior 
administration. Was there any communication between anyone in McGill’s administration and 
Andrew Potter about the op-ed? If so, did that communication include censure or the threat of 
sanction? And was any pressure placed on Potter to issue the apology? 
McGill University needs to reconsider and apologize for its statement, and issue a new 
statement reassuring McGill faculty and students, as well as the broader academic community, 
of its commitment to the basic principles of academic freedom. And if any administrator voiced 
displeasure to Potter or threatened to sanction him, that individual is simply not fit to have a 
role in university governance. 
There will no doubt be readers who will argue this an overreaction to a simple tweet. These will 
tend to be people who see Potter’s op-ed as containing little to no value, or worse, to being an 
insult to Quebecers or even, as one person suggested to me on Twitter, racist hate speech. 
But much like free speech, academic freedom is only meaningful if it protects ideas, arguments, 
or research that we don’t all agree with. Absent rare instances where research practices 
directly cause appreciable harm, universities exist to protect, not denigrate or even comment 
upon, the right of their scholars to voice their opinions in public forums or the classroom as 
they see fit. On this score, McGill’s failure should be seen for the very real danger it poses. 
Emmett Macfarlane is a political science professor at the University of Waterloo. You can find 
him on Twitter @EmmMacfarlane 