Message from the Principal and Vice-Chancellor of McGill 
University 
Nouvelles 
PUBLIÉ: 23MAR2017 
Dear members of the McGill community, 
Professor Andrew Potter resigned from his position as Director of the McGill Institute for the 
Study of Canada (MISC). He made his letter of resignation public on social media. 
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of Professor Potter and his courage in making this 
very difficult and painful decision. 
The Board of MISC regretfully accepted Professor Potter’s resignation. The mission of MISC is to 
promote a better understanding of Canada through the study of our heritage and to support 
the study of Canada across the country and internationally. Professor Potter recognized that he 
had failed to uphold this mission and that the “credibility of the Institute would be best served 
by his resignation”. 
Andrew Potter remains a professor and a valued member of the McGill community. We are 
committed to offering him our support as he transitions from the Director position. 
His resignation provoked unfounded rumours and concerns regarding academic freedom. 
I want to assure members of the McGill community that academic freedom is a foundational 
principle of McGill University, as enunciated in our Senate and Board approved Statement of 
Academic Freedom: 
Statement of Academic Freedom: 
Academic freedom is central to McGill University’s mission of advancing learning through 
teaching, scholarship and service to society. 
The scholarly members of the university have the freedom to pursue research and artistic 
creation and to disseminate their results, without being constrained by political or disciplinary 
orthodoxies, monetary incentives or punitive measures as a result of their academic pursuits. 
They may exercise this freedom in the service of both the university and the wider society. 
When scholarly members of the university participate in public forums and debates, they 
should represent their views as their own. 
The exercise of academic freedom requires collegial governance with the full participation of 
scholarly members. They retain the right of free expression, including the freedom to criticize 
one another, university policies and administration.
The university and its officers have a duty to protect the academic freedom of its scholarly 
community, both individually and collectively, from infringement and undue external influence 
as well as to maintain the university’s institutional autonomy. 
Suzanne Fortier 
Principal and Vice-Chancellor