Local
Watch
Trade War
In Pictures
CTV Your Morning
Sign In
Montreal
Bishop’s University addresses
derogatory language
allegations in internal memo
By Rachel Lau
Published: January 16, 2025 at 12:47PM EST
Bishop’s University has reached out to its community about a tenured professor who has allegedly been using
derogatory language in her classes.
Bishop’s University has reached out to its community following a CTV News report about
a tenured professor who has allegedly been using derogatory language in her classroom
for years.
In an internal memo sent to students and staff, and obtained by CTV News, the
university’s principal and vice-principals write, “We first want to recognize that many
members of our community might find the content of the media report challenging and
emotionally straining.”
This comes after allegations were made by multiple students against sociology
professor Dr. Cheryl Gosselin, claiming she stereotyped Black men and women and used
triggering slurs when talking about the LGBTQIA2S+ community.
“She said the ‘F’ slur,” sociology student Marie-May Lamothe told CTV News at the time.
“When she said it, she said it many times. She said it at least six or seven times, and
In its letter, the university emphasizes that complaints “should be discussed with the
professor, the program chair, the dean, or the ombudsperson. Reports or complaints will
be treated confidentially and investigated fairly.”
Students at Bishop's University allege a professor has been using derogatory language in her classroom for years.
All the same, Bishop’s says it “will be pursuing a conversation in Senate, starting at its
Jan. 24 meeting, on ways to better communicate resources and processes available to
students.”
It states that it “will also be examining how our processes can be improved.”
The letter goes on to mention that “universities are places of learning through the free
and open discussion of sometimes difficult or challenging subjects and ideas.”
As such, “professors carry the responsibility to pursue truth, advance learning and
disseminate knowledge in a responsible way. Open dialogue and constructive debate
will always be encouraged, within a safe and respectful environment for all.”
READ MORE: Bishop’s students allege teacher uses degrading terms, university
doing nothing
In its memo, the university laments that its “internal processes are not sufficiently known
or understood, or may be seen as insufficient.”
However, political science student Aaliyah Wilburn told CTV News that she did ask
Gosselin to consider the repercussions of using such strong language.
“She basically blew me off. Told me I was incorrect, and basically, she made me feel
dumb for saying something,” she said.
Wilburn says she also followed the necessary steps and reached out to the university’s
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) department.
“It just felt like they were trying to find reasons and excuses for why Cheryl was saying
the things that she was saying, when really there is no context that you need to have
with it,” she said. “There is no excuse that you need to have with it. Like, you said what
you said; hold your teachers accountable.”
Sociology student Malik Kessouagni says he witnessed Wilburn’s attempts to open a
discussion on the issue.
“Her [Gosselin’s] defence was it’s not a word that she uses on a daily basis” he said “In
“Her [Gosselin’s] defence was it’s not a word that she uses on a daily basis,” he said. “In
my opinion, regardless of the fact if you use it on a daily basis or not, you still used it.
Therefore, it’s still an issue and you do not want to hold yourself accountable.”
Following the CTV News report, Quebec’s higher education ministry said it was shocked
by the allegations.
“We are in close communication with the establishment, which confirms that it is doing
everything in its power to get to the bottom of the situation,” said a spokesperson for
Minister Pascale Déry.
Responding to CTV News' request for comment, Bishop’s University states, “the internal
communication you are referring to reflects the fact that, as a learning institution, we are
always open to reviewing existing processes to ensure better outcomes for members of
our community.”
The school also reiterated the fact that it “cannot comment on individual cases or
ongoing processes.”
Students taking Gosselin’s winter 2025 semester classes tell CTV News that following
the report, their courses were reassigned to other professors.
Bishop's students allege teacher uses degrading terms, university
doing nothing
Quebec's immigration minister wants to limit the number of foreign
students
Bishop's University reports drop in enrolment despite exemption from
tuition hike
Report an Error
Editorial standards & policies
Why you can trust CTV News
Rachel Lau
Digital reporter