Academic Freedom and 
Tenure Committee
Simon Fraser 
University
Autumn 1970
Simon Fraser University1 
At a meeting of the Executive and Finance Committee 
of the C.A.U.T. on Thursday, 18 June 1970, a committee 
of inquiry was established to report on the status of 
suspensions, dismissal procedures, and appeals of 
faculty members in the PSA Department at Simon 
Fraser University. The members appointed to the 
committee were A. E. Malloch (Chairman), L. F. 
Kristjanson, and I. D. Pal. Letters were sent at the end 
of June to the PSA faculty members involved, and to 
the president of the university, Kenneth Strand, 
asking them to submit any information or comment 
they might wish to make before the committee visited 
the campus toward the end of July. Difficulties in the 
postal service at that time made the delivery of this 
preliminary information uncertain, but very full 
documentation was received from the President of the 
University and more was prepared by the faculty 
members for delivery to the committee on its arrival 
in Burnaby.
The committee visited the Simon Fraser campus for 
three days, 20, 21 and 22 July, interviewing most of 
the principals in the dismissal cases, and a number of 
other persons. The committee met as a whole with the 
President on the first day, and the chairman of the 
committee met again with the President on the third 
day accompanied by Professor M. Mackauer, Acting 
President of the Simon Fraser Faculty Association. Of 
the eight professors against whom dismissal charges 
have been brought, the committee met Professors K. 
Aberle, M. Briemberg, J. Leggett, N. Popkin, and P. 
Wheeldon. The three remaining, S. Ahmad, L. 
Feldhammer, and D. Potter, were out of the country 
and therefore unavailable. The committee met also 
with Professors T. Brose, and G. Sperling, who were 
appealing decisions made in August 1969 concerning 
their academic appointments. The committee met also 
with Professor Mackauer and the executive of the 
Simon Fraser Faculty Association; with Professor D. 
H. Sullivan, the Dean of the Faculty of Arts; with a 
group of undergraduate students registered in the PSA 
department who had requested a meeting with the
committee; with Professor H. Sharma of the PSA 
department who had requested a meeting; and the 
chairman met Professor H. Hickerson of the PSA 
department who had also requested a meeting. The 
committee was not able to meet with Professor A. 
Mitzman, who had requested a meeting but who was 
at the last moment unable to meet the committee.
The eight faculty members who were suspended 3 
October 1969 received letters of 17 October 1969 
from President Strand informing them officially that 
he was initiating dismissal procedures against them, 
asking them if they wished hearing committees set up 
(as provided in Section 4 of the Simon Fraser Statement 
on Academic Freedom and Tenure), and requesting 
them, if they wished committees, to nominate their 
members within fourteen days. Professors Ahmad, 
Briemberg, Feldhammer, Leggett, Potter and 
Wheeldon each named the same person, Professor W. 
Livant. Professor Aberle named Professor J. Jorgensen. 
Professor Popkin named Professor J. Zaslove. As a 
consequence, there were to be three separate dismissal 
hearings, one for the group of six faculty members, 
one for Professor Popkin, and one for Professor 
Aberle. This report will trace the activities of each 
committee (though Professor Aberle's committee was 
to disappear and her case to be assimilated to the 
hearings for Ahmad et al). Following the sections on 
the three dismissal hearings will be a section on the 
appeals of Professors Brose and Sperling who were 
away from Simon Fraser University on leave during 
the strike in the PSA department in September and 
October 1969, and who began appeals before the 
University Tenure Committee when they returned to 
the University.
Ahmad, Briemberg, Feldhammer, 
Leggett, Potter, Wheeldon 
On 3 October 1969, President Strand suspended eight 
members of the PSA department, invoking the 
authority of Section 58(1) of the British Columbia 
Universities Act, and explicitly suspending them not 
only from their teaching assignments, but also from
1. This report was written by the committee of inquiry appointed 
18 June 1970 and submitted to the A.F.&T. Committee at its 17-
18 September meeting.
their committee assignments and their voting rights 
in decision-making bodies of the university. He 
pointed out at the same time that the Universities Act 
provided them with the right to appeal suspensions to 
the Board of Governors. President Strand might have 
suspended them under the authority of the local 
Academic Freedom and Tenure Statement (S.4.1.g), 
but that document would have enabled him to 
suspend them from teaching only. Subsequent events 
suggest that the President's decision to invoke the 
Universities Act led to considerable delay in the 
hearing of the dismissal charges against seven of the 
eight faculty members. Several of the suspended 
members did in fact appeal the suspension to the 
Board of Governors. The appeals were denied, but in 
the course of the hearings before the Board the 
question of the status and force of the local A.F. & T. 
Statement was raised by counsel for the faculty 
members, and in the opinion of the faculty members 
and their counsel was not satisfactorily answered by 
the university lawyers or by members of the Board of 
Governors. In consequence, one of the faculty 
members who had appealed the suspension, Professor 
Prudence Wheeldon, filed a Statement of Claim on 5 
December 1969 in the Supreme Court of British 
Columbia, asking the Court to rule (inter alia) that the 
local A.F. & T. Statement was part of Professor 
Wheeldon's contract of employment, and therefore 
binding on the university. That Professor Wheeldon 
was not alone in her concern about the status of the 
A.F. & T. Statement is clear from a memo sent 5 
January 1970 by Professor Lionel Kenner (chairman 
of the University Affairs Committee of the Simon 
Fraser Faculty Association) to President Strand, and a 
memo dated 28 January 1970 from Professor Kenner 
to Professor Walkley (the president of the faculty 
association). Following the issuance of the writ on 5 
December 1969, the customary legal ritual unfolded, 
complete with Demands for Discovery of Documents, 
Affidavits of Documents, Examination for Discovery, 
Adjournment of Trial, etc., and finally the judgment 
on 18 June 1970, which found that the local A.F. & T. 
Statement formed no part of the contract of 
employment of a faculty member at Simon Fraser, and 
that the Board of Governors in approving the 
Statement essentially adopted a resolution of policy 
which was not intended to create legal obligations.
Though the case of Wheeldon versus Simon Fraser 
University was to delay the hearing committee for the 
six faculty members, the attempts to complete the 
membership of the committee proceeded during the 
time that Professor Wheel don's claim was being filed 
in the Supreme Court. Professor J. S. Dupre, President 
Strand's nominee, and Professor W. Livant, the 
nominee of the faculty members, attempted to agree 
on the third member to be the chairman. They were 
unable to agree, and according to the provisions of the 
A.F. & T. Statement the matter went for resolution to 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of British 
Columbia who on 10 February 1970 named Professor 
E. E. Palmer to be the third member and chairman.
By the middle of March, Professor Palmer had been 
invited to serve and had agreed, and the faculty 
members had in turn been advised of who the 
chairman of their committee would be. The first 
hearings were scheduled for the third and fourth of 
April. The start of the hearings was twice delayed, 
first for two weeks on the request of one of the other 
members of the committee, and then for a month 
because of the illness of the chairman. The first 
meeting of the committee took place on 15 May 1970 
and was adjourned on the same day until judgment 
had been rendered in the case of Wheeldon versus 
SFU, though a hearing was tentatively scheduled for 
22 June. Though the judgment was handed down on 
18 June, the hearings were again delayed by illness and 
did not resume until 21 July, the second day of the 
visit to the SFU campus by the C.A.U.T. committee of 
inquiry. Professor Aberle's case had been added by this 
time to those of the original six faculty members.
This hearing committee handed down its decision on 
24 July 1970, finding that there was no cause for 
dismissal of the seven faculty members. President 
Strand challenged the decision almost immediately, 
but asked the committee to reconsider its report (as 
the Simon Fraser A.F. & T. Statement provides). On 
20 July 1970, President Strand had explained to the 
C.A.U.T. committee of inquiry, by means of a 
blackboard diagram, that the A.F. & T. Statement did 
not permit him to recommend dismissal to the Board 
of Governors unless the hearing committee so found, 
and then assured us that he considered himself bound
by a finding of "no cause" from a hearing committee. 
In a telegram of 26 July, Professor Malloch reminded 
President Strand of his undertaking, but after the 
Palmer committee reaffirmed its decision on 29 July, 
President Strand declared the findings invalid and 
confronted six of the faculty members with the choice 
of a second hearing or outright dismissal, and in the 
event recommended the dismissal of Professors 
Aberle and Potter. He withdrew the charges against 
Professor Leggett, whose appointment lapsed 31 
August 1970. (The dispute concerning the Palmer 
committee decision is documented more fully in 
Professor Berland's report of 26 August 1970.)2
Popkin 
The membership of the hearing committee for 
Professor Popkin was completed on 29 January 1970 
when Professor Nelson (President Strand's nominee) 
and Professor Zaslove (Professor Popkin's nominee) 
agreed on the name of Professor Gideon Rosenbluth, 
who consented to serve. The first formal hearings 
took place on 13 March, and hearings were held 
regularly from that time on. At the time this 
committee of inquiry visited the campus, 
approximately twenty days of hearings had been 
logged, and the hearings have continued since.
Aberle 
In early December 1969, Professor Kreisel (President 
Strand's nominee) and Professor Jorgensen (Professor 
Aberle's nominee) agreed to invite Professor P. C. 
Gutkind to act as chairman of the hearing committee. 
Professor Gutkind replied that before he could accept 
the chairmanship of the hearing committee, he felt 
that there should be some agreement about the 
relation of the hearing to the investigation being 
undertaken by the American Anthropological 
Association. This and other questions raised by 
Professor Gutkind led Professor Kreisel to reconsider 
his decision about naming Professor Gutkind as 
chairman. On 9 February, Professor Willard Allen, 
the President of C.A.U.T., released a statement 
expressing his views concerning qualifications for 
membership in hearing committees, and touching in 
general terms on several of the points raised by
Professor Kreisel. In a letter of 5 March 1970, 
Professor Kreisel wrote to President Strand saying 
that on reflection he was prepared to reaffirm his 
original decision to accept Professor Gutkind as the 
chairman of the committee. However, on 13 March, 
Professor Kreisel wrote to Professor Gutkind to 
announce that he was himself withdrawing from the 
committee as a consequence of having been appointed 
Academic Vice-President at the University of Alberta. 
Professor Kreisel's "final act prior to resigning from 
the Committee" was to withdraw his request of 11 
December that Professor Gutkind serve as chairman, 
in order to leave his successor completely free to 
participate in the selection of a chairman. Professor 
Jorgensen in a letter of 25 March to Professor Gutkind 
objected to Professor Kreisel's withdrawing of his 
agreement on the chairman, but Professor Gutkind in 
a reply of 2 April announced that he would not in any 
case be able to serve as chairman as he was preparing 
to leave for a year of sabbatical study. Meanwhile, 
President Strand, on 1 April 1970, informed Professor 
Aberle and her nominee that he was nominating 
Professor W. R. Gordon to replace Professor Kreisel. 
Professor Jorgensen and Professor Gordon were 
unable to agree on a chairman and the three-week 
period after which an approach could be made to the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of British 
Columbia began 12 May 1970. No approach, however, 
was made to the Chief Justice after the lapse of three 
weeks, and in mid-June Professor Aberle wrote to a 
member of the hearing committee for her six 
colleagues and asked if her case could be assimilated to 
theirs. The chairman of that committee, Professor 
Palmer, approached President Strand to see if he 
would be willing to have the charges against Professor 
Aberle brought within the context of that committee. 
After some delay and negotiation the matter was 
finally agreed to in the middle of July, and when the 
Palmer committee resumed its hearings on 21 July, 
Professor Aberle's case was taken up with those of her 
six colleagues.
2. See Simon Fraser Dispute (Il), pp. 65-84 of this issue.
Appeal of Professors 
Brose and Sperling 
The recommendation of the Departmental Tenure 
Committee appointed for the PSA department in the 
summer of 1969 by Dean Sullivan was that Professors 
Brose and Sperling should have no renewal of their 
appointments unless they completed the requirements 
for their Ph.D. degrees before 30 April 1970. Dean 
Sullivan concurred with this recommendation. As 
Professors Brose and Sperling were away from the 
Simon Fraser campus in the late summer of 1969 and 
were to be on leave during the autumn semester of 
1969, there was both delay and confusion about 
informing them of the decisions concerning their 
appointments. Both indicated early in the autumn of 
1969 that they wished to appeal the decisions by the 
route provided in the local A.F. & T. Statement - that 
is to the Dean of their Faculty, and then to the 
University Tenure Committee. A resolution of the 
Board of Governors of Simon Fraser had made 
provision for appeal procedures to take place after the 
31 August deadline, but required that they be 
completed before the meeting of the Board of 
Governors in October 1969.
The deadline for completing the appeals was waived, 
however, and the appeal procedures did not actually 
begin until early in January 1970, by which time 
Professors Brose and Sperling had both returned to 
the campus and taken up their teaching again. The 
account of the appeals themselves must be summarized 
radically because the procedures of appeal led to an 
exchange of literally scores of exasperated 
memoranda, filled with questions and replies, 
proposals and counterproposals, admonishments and 
recriminations. Both Professors Brose and Sperling 
met in January with Dean Sullivan, who recommended 
to the President of the University that the deadline for 
completion of the Ph.D. degree be put back in the case 
of both professors to 15 August 1970. After much 
negotiation about the time, place, and format of the 
meetings, Professors Brose and Sperling each met 
with the University Tenure Committee in the Spring 
of 1970. At the time the C.A.U.T. committee of 
inquiry visited the Simon Fraser campus in late July, 
negotiations were under way for mended to the 
President of the University that the deadline for
completion of further appearances by both professors 
before the University Tenure Committee. Both did 
appear again before the committee, which finally 
rejected their appeals in August. In the Spring of 1970, 
Professor Brose received an appointment for the 
1970-71 year at Fairhaven College in Washington 
State, and Professor Sperling received an appointment 
for the 1970-71 session at the Regina Campus of the 
University of Saskatchewan.
Summary 
To speak of “delays” in these dismissal and appeal cases 
is to beg the question. Canadian universities do not 
have extensive experience with the kinds of dismissal 
procedures that are recommended in the C.A.U.T. 
guidelines, and approximated in the Simon Fraser 
A.F. & T. Statement. It must be obvious that the 
careful procedures that C.A.U.T. considers import ant 
as safeguards for academic freedom are not likely to be 
completed in a matter of days or even weeks. The 
committee hearing charges against Mr. Stanley Gray 
at McGill in 1969 sat from March until August. There 
was no reason to expect that the time required at 
Simon Fraser would be less, and since there were 
charges brought against eight different faculty 
members, it might have been expected that the 
proceedings would take considerably longer - even if, 
as proved the case, a number of the faculty members 
elected to have their cases considered together.
We can identify no extraordinary delay in the 
hearings of charges against Professor Popkin. The 
selection of a chairman for the committee hearing the 
charges against six other members of the PSA 
department took somewhat longer, but that delay was 
foreseen in the local A.F. & T. Statement. We have 
noted that the hearing of charges against the six 
faculty members was delayed by the suit instituted by 
Professor Wheeldon, but we have also noted that the 
issue she wished clarified was a matter of concern to 
other faculty members than those under suspension, 
and we find no evidence that the suit was undertaken 
in order to delay the dismissal hearings themselves. 
The selection of a chairman for Professor Aberle's 
committee appears to have been delayed somewhat by 
the misgivings that President Strand and his nominee 
came to have about the choice of Professor Gutkind,
but the method of selecting a chairman that is 
incorporated in the Simon Fraser Academic Freedom 
and Tenure Statement opens the way to these 
misgivings and second thoughts. When the selection 
of a committee chairman is left to the nominees of the 
two opposing parties, it is almost certain that these 
nominees will not be left to their own counsel, and 
they evidently were not in the case of this committee. 
In any case, Professor Gutkind himself wished the 
hearings delayed until the report from the American 
Anthropological Association had come in, so that 
ultimately the disagreement about the chairman did 
not delay proceedings.3
Originally published in the CAUT Bulletin 
(Autumn 1970 edition, pages 59 to 64).
This report has been redesigned.
But having pointed out the inherent likelihood of 
extended hearings in these dismissal cases, we must 
add that the deep suspicion the opposing parties feel 
for each other at Simon Fraser has probably 
somewhat prolonged every step in the dismissal 
hearings (and very obviously prolonged the appeals of 
Professors Brose and Sperling). The C.A.U.T. 
Guidelines propose dismissal procedures that can, if 
they are accepted as such, be a resolution of apparently 
irresolvable differences. When the differences gather 
as much bitterness as they have gathered over the past 
year and a half at Simon Fraser, the dismissal 
procedures can themselves become a means of further 
pursuing the conflict. In Clausewitzian terms, the 
dismissal procedures become, for the opposing parties, 
extensions of policy by other means. And when this 
situation arises, the delays inherent in the procedures 
are bound to be aggravated.
15 September 1970 
A.E. Malloch (Chairman) 
L.F. Kristjanson 
I.D. Pal
3. The history of Professor Aberle's committee raises the 
question of the relation of professional associations to 
dismissal hearing committees. In our v ew it would have 
constituted an improper delay if Professor Aberle's committee 
had waited for the report from the American Anthropological 
Association. The issues in a dismissal hearing are bound to go 
beyond those within the purview of professional associations, 
and though it seems perfectly conceivable that a hearing
committee might wish to approach_ a professional 
association for help in assessing professional competence, we 
do not think that a properly constituted hearing committee 
should postpone its work to allow professional associations to 
complete parallel dismissal hearings.