Academic Freedom and 
Tenure Committee
Report on the 
Simon Fraser 
University Dispute
Winter 1970
Report on the Simon Fraser 
University Dispute
This is the revised and updated report on the Simon Fraser 
University dispute. It was submitted to the C.A.U.T. Council 
at the November 1969 meeting and received for 
information purposes.
The present conflict at Simon Fraser University, 
which led to the strike within the Political Science, 
Sociology and Anthropology (PSA) Department, has a 
complex background. Considerations of time and of 
space require that only its essential outline be 
presented here. Formed as an "experimental" 
department from the time of the opening of Simon 
Fraser, PSA appears to have occasioned a fair amount 
of comment, both of praise and of concern: praise for 
its superiority over "conventional" departments in its 
field, and concern for its possible sacrifice of academic 
integrity in favour of ideological commitment. 
Various members of the SFU administration have 
expressed great concern about the operation of PSA, 
especially during this last academic year. This concern 
was not limited to the administration, apparently: on 
6 May 1969 the SFU Faculty Association Executive 
requested the Acting President of SFU to order an 
investigation of four allegations concerning PSA: (a) 
under­ graduate student participation on graduate 
supervisory committees; (b) voting on grades by 
students enrolled in some PSA classes; (c) opening of 
confidential faculty files to students and others; (d) 
possible misuse of budget monies in PSA. This 
investigation seems not to have taken place; the 
allegations went unanswered, but the atmosphere of 
suspicion and distrust remained.
In June, four members of the PSA Department, 
including the member elected by the department as 
Acting Chairman for the summer trimester, presented 
a paper appealing to colleagues to abandon the 
"politics of confrontation," and to de-emphasize 
ideological unity. The specific proposals outlined in 
the paper were rejected by a majority vote of the 
department as an unnecessary compromise. The 
Acting Chairman resigned, and the Chairman of the 
previous semester, Professor Mordecai Briemberg, 
was acclaimed chairman. Professor Briemberg claims 
that he had originally been elected for a 2-year term
(he was on research semester during the summer 
trimester); later it was claimed by the Administration 
that all elections were subject to ratification or 
renewal each semester during the period of adopting 
new procedures for elective departmental chairmen. 
The Dean of Arts on 10 July 1969 announced that he 
was not willing to accept Professor Briemberg as 
Acting Chairman because the Dean lacked "confidence 
in his administrative ability," and because Professor 
Briemberg was "unwilling to commit himself to abide 
by university policies and procedures and urge PSA to 
do so until such time as those policies which PSA 
disagreed with could be changed through the 
established procedures for change. "The Department 
was asked to nominate another candidate for the 
chairmanship, or alternatively to nominate 2 persons 
to sit on a Faculty of Arts Trusteeship of the 
Department together with the Dean and 2 of his 
nominees. The trusteeship, presumably, was to 
undertake a "critical reassessment of the 
administrative organization, procedures and 
responsibilities of PSA and to present them for 
approval under existing university regulations."
The PSA Department rejected both of these proposals, 
reaffirming their confidence in Professor Briemberg's 
chairmanship, and requesting that more specific 
charges be brought forward to substantiate the 
Dean's loss of confidence in the PSA administrative 
organization. To the best of our knowledge, the Dean 
has not responded to this request. However, the Dean 
states that he had a private 2-hour conference with 
Professor Briemberg, who, he alleges, threatened libel 
action should the Dean make public allegations.
On 14 July, the Dean recommended to the President 
the establishment of a 5-man trusteeship for PSA, and 
urged PSA to name 2 members. PSA again rejected 
this proposal. On 22 July, 5 trustees were named by 
the President. Of these 5, 4 were Arts faculty members 
from outside the PSA Department. The fifth, 
Professor T. Bottomore, had been the first Head of the 
PSA Department, but had left SFU almost two years 
before, and was teaching at the University of Sussex. It 
was announced by the administration that Professor 
Bottomore would return to the SFU campus, 
presumably during the summer, and he is listed as a
member of the Department, part-time; later Professor 
Bottomore stated that he was not in fact planning to 
return. The PSA Department was administered 
under the trusteeship (up to 14 October) under the 
continuing sharp protests of most members of the 
Department.
A basic element in the dispute between PSA and other 
parts of the SFU community was the long-standing 
disagreement on procedures governing recommendations 
on faculty renewals, promotions, and tenure. Under 
the provisions of the University's Academic Freedom 
and Tenure Brief (as modified by a "statement of 
intent" ratified by the Faculty Association and the 
Board of Governors on 19 September 1968), each 
department was to name a departmental tenure 
committee of 6 members, two from each professorial 
rank. Departures from this pattern required approval 
of the 7-man University Tenure Committee (2 faculty 
members elected by each of the 3 SFU faculties, plus the 
Academic Vice-President as non-voting chairman). 
The University Tenure Committee (UTC) on 25 
February 1969 rejected the proposed constitution of the 
PSA Departmental Tenure Committee (DTC). PSA 
reaffirmed its initial proposal, which was again 
rejected by the UTC in March.
In May, the Dean forwarded another, substantially 
unchanged PSA recommendation to UTC, with his 
approval of the proposed composition, but with 
objections to the PSA procedures. These procedures 
included the principle of student parity at all levels of 
departmental decision­ making. There was a parallel 
student Departmental Personnel Committee (6 
students); further, the recommendations of the two 
parallel committees were required to be referred back 
to the entire Department for approval before being 
forwarded to UTC. The Department had been 
organized as two plena; a faculty plenum and a student 
plenum of equal size which met separately. Both plena 
had the authority to ratify or to veto any 
recommendation of the other.
On 9 June 1969 the UTC reconsidered the 
resubmission from PSA, and rejected it, claiming that 
it was not in accord with the SFU Academic Freedom 
and Tenure Brief. It was in large part an attempt to 
solve the stalemate on these procedures that the 4-
man group in PSA referred to above had introduced 
its "compromise" resolutions which were defeated by 
the PSA departmental majority, which in turn led to 
the resignation of the Acting Chairman.
Acting under the rather complex provisions of the 
SFU A.F. & T. Brief with its recently approved 
amendments, the Dean of Arts himself nominated a 6-
man Departmental Tenure Committee for PSA on 24 
July, and requested PSA ratification for this committee, 
all of whose members were drawn from the PSA 
Department. On 29 July, Professor Briemberg wrote 
that he saw "no reason for creation of a new 
committee."
On 2 August, the UTC instructed the Dean to name a 
Departmental Tenure Committee for PSA, in 
consultation with the other two Deans, in accordance 
with article 3.6 of the A.F. & T. Brief. This was done 
on 7 August, and approved by UTC on 12 August. 
The new committee consisted of 5 faculty members 
drawn from outside the PSA Department, and one 
professor from within. Later, the Dean claimed that 
this selection was made necessary by the fact that 
members of the PSA Department refused to serve on a 
Tenure Committee not elected by the Department. This 
Dean's DTC proceeded to make recommendations on 
some 18 individuals in PSA for contract renewals (11), 
tenure (7), and promotions (3). The DTC is 
empowered to recommend on contract renewals, 
subject to review by the Dean, for transmission 
directly to the President. Tenure and promotion 
recommendations must go to the University Tenure 
Committee.
On 21 August, the DTC sent its recommendations to 
the Dean, who forwarded appropriate materials to the 
UTC on 22 August. On 25 August the UTC arrived at 
its decisions, which tended in the main to be more 
stringent (or more negative) even than the Dean's 
Departmental Tenure Committee.
The resulting situation can scarcely be regarded as 
satisfactory to anyone. Some 18 renewal, promotion 
and tenure decisions were reached by two committees 
which, together, were able to muster one professor in 
the departments of political science, sociology, or 
anthropology. Recommendations on promotion and
tenure (the latter surely the most important single 
step in an academic career) seem to have been 
accomplished with astonishing speed - tenure and 
promotion recommendations went from the Dean to 
the UTC on a Friday, were acted on by UTC by 
Monday, and were in the hands of the Board of 
Governors for its meeting on Wednesday. This rather 
indecorous haste makes it more difficult to understand 
why a University Tenure Committee, normally seen 
as providing an overview of procedures and standards 
used by the various Departmental Tenure Committees, 
should have made a number of recommendations 
more stringent than those of the Dean's Departmental 
Tenure Committee for PSA without consultation or 
reference back to that Committee. Nor does it seem to 
have occurred to the UTC that since unusual 
circumstances prevailed within the PSA Department it 
might be wise to seek external assessments from social 
scientists outside the University.
Because the A.F. & T. Brief gives a deadline of 31 
August for notification of non-renewals for the 
following year, the recommendations of both 
Departmental and University committees were taken 
directly to the Board of Governors on 27 August. The 
Acting President informed the Dean that the Board 
had undertaken to observe the rights of appeal 
provided in the A.F. & T. Brief. Each letter sent by the 
Acting President to PSA faculty members on the 
committees' recommendations contained the 
assurance that the Board would reverse any decision 
affected by a later appeal, retroactively to 1 September.
A number of PSA faculty members charged that this 
procedure represented a contravention of the A.F. & 
T. Brief. Some claimed that since the negative renewal 
and tenure decisions affected primarily the more 
"vocal" or "radical" members of the department, these 
were further and more extreme instances of the 
"witch-hunting" and political purging that they 
alleged the University had undertaken against the PSA 
Department.
On 3-4 September, the Executive Secretary of the 
C.A.U.T. and the Chairman of its Committee on 
Academic Freedom and Tenure visited the SFU 
campus for informal talks with individuals in the SFU 
Faculty Association, Administration, and PSA
Department. On the basis of these talks, and in the 
asbence of a formal investigation, they made certain 
proposals to all parties on possible internal means for 
arriving at an arbitration or mediation of a dispute 
that had become emotionally charged and that was 
leading to extreme polarizations of attitude 
throughout the SFU community. They assured 
members of PSA - that the Academic Freedom and 
Tenure Committee of C.A.U.T. would certainly take 
up the grievances laid before it, and asked for time to 
deal with these before PSA considered other modes of 
action. It was suggested that a reasonable target date 
for C.A.U.T. action might be early October, the time 
set for the next meeting of the A.F. & T. Committee. 
Both sides were requested in the meantime to avoid 
confrontation tactics. No formal vote was taken by the 
PSA Department (the C.A.U.T. team met with about 9 
of its members), but there was some reluctance on the 
part of these 9 to make a commitment to abstain from 
"direct action" - the nature of which remained 
unspecified - even though they were appealing to 
C.A.U.T. for assistance.
C.A.U.T. continued informal discussions by letter, 
telegram and telephone with SFU. By 19 September 
there was strong evidence that parties in the dispute 
were on a collision course: there was talk of a strike 
vote, and of reprisals; one could see on the horizon 
the possibilities of picket lines, of construction 
workers, faculty and students being asked not to cross 
them, of violence, of police on campus. Professor 
Willard Allen, President of C.A.U.T., issued a press 
statement asking for some " mode of reconciliation 
before further and more dangerous confrontations are 
allowed to take place." In particular, Professor Allen 
proposed several steps, all of which had already been 
discussed with both Administration and PSA from the 
time of the visit to SFU by the A.F. & T. Committee 
Chairman and Executive Secretary on September 3-4: 
(a) an external committee of review, drawn from 
academics in the appropriate fields from outside SFU, 
to review the present relationships of the PSA 
Department to the University; (b) provision for a 
suitable agency of appeal for the 10 faculty members 
of PSA for whom unfavourable recommendations on 
renewal, promotion, or tenure had been reached 
through a process which deprived them of proper
evaluation by faculty of professional competence in 
their own fields; (c) a suspension of the trusteeship 
during this period of examination and review.
A telephone call by Professor Allen to Professor 
Briemberg at 10:30 a.m. on Monday, 22 September, 
reaffirmed the same basic position.
President Strand responded by a public statement 
indicating his reaction to these proposals. He had 
already (on 15 September) addressed a request to 
C.A.U.T. that it name 3 faculty members to an 
external examining committee; A.U.C.C. to name 2 
others. His response to points (b) and (c) of the 
C.A.U.T. proposals summarized above was mixed, and 
not altogether satisfactory, but seemed to C.A.U.T. to 
offer ground for further negotiation. The PSA 
response was rather confusing to C.A.U.T.: it 
indicated willingness to negotiate on the 3 C.A.U.T. 
proposals, but also repeated at the same time its own 
"four demands," which had been circulated earlier and 
which had the effect of asking for all-but-total 
autonomy for the PSA Department. PSA set down 
quite precise terms for the negotiation process, and 
demanded a response from the President in two days, 
failing which a strike would begin at 12:30 p.m., 
Wednesday, 24 September. The PSA response was 
developed at a meeting on Monday, 22 September, in 
which the Department had formally dissolved itself 
and reformed as the "PSA General Assembly," which 
was to consist of all students in PSA classes, plus all 
faculty members, in a 1-man 1-vote organization. The 
meeting appears to have been constituted of some 700 
students (of 1700 taking PSA classes), and 14 faculty 
members. Approximately half of the faculty members 
voted against the strike; the other half, and almost all 
of the 700 students, voted in favour.
On Sunday, 21 September, the Executive Secretary of 
C.A.U.T. had sent the following wire to the PSA 
Department: "C.A.U.T. cannot support PSA in 4 
demands to SFU Administration for complete 
autonomy, that is, complete dissociation from policies 
and procedures agreed upon by majority of University 
faculty. Therefore we will not support PSA if it adopts 
strike action in pursuit of those demands. We believe 
appeal procedures, external review, and suspension of 
trusteeship as outlined in our press release of 19 
September are proper basis for negotiation and should 
be supported by PSA."
On 23 September, the day before the strike was to 
begin, Professor Allen issued a second press release 
disapproving of the strike action "while recognized 
channels of discussion, negotiation or appeal are still 
open." On the same date Professor Allen sent a 
telegram to each member of the PSA Department 
stating that "if you do not immediately notify me of 
your renunciation of strike action I have no 
alternative but to recommend immediately to 
C.A.U.T. bodies that neither your personal case nor 
the departmental case be supported by C.A.U.T. in 
any way."
It is unfortunate that there was no consultation on the 
part of PSA directly with C.A.U.T. either before the 
strike action was voted on, or afterward, in response 
to our appeals to try the available avenues of 
negotiation and appeal before resorting to such 
actions as the strike.
But the PSA strike action did begin at 12:30 
Wednesday, 24 September. Within a week there were 
allegations of interference with other classes, of 
student protests about interference with their 
academic programmes, of default of contract. On 
Friday, 3 October, President Strand initiated 
suspension and dismissal proceedings against 9 
members of the PSA faculty participating in the strike 
action. There were some 6 members of the 
Department teaching last fall who were not on strike 
and not participating in any of the strike actions.
The Committee on Academic Freedom and Tenure of 
C.A.U.T. met on 3-4 October, and spent much of its 
time discussing the SFU case on 3 October. On 4 
October, Professor Allen met with the Committee 
during the afternoon to discuss his recommendation 
of 23 September for non-support. The following 
motion was unanimously adopted by the A.F. & T. 
Committee:
The recent decisions of the University Tenure Committee 
of Simon Fraser University on renewals, promotions, and 
tenure for PSA faculty members should be open to an
appeal which includes assessment by a group of academics 
in the fields of political science, sociology, and anthropology 
from outside Simon Fraser University, and the proposed 
constitution and procedures of this appeal should be made 
public prior to appeal. Notwithstanding the above, the 
Academic Freedom and Tenure Committee regards the 
present PSA strike action as inappropriate and unjustified 
and therefore suspends action on the original appeals of 
those individuals who have participated in the PSA strike 
action.
C.A.U.T. was requested by the SFU Faculty 
Association Executive to review the SFU dismissal 
and suspension procedures and to recommend on 
these. This C.A.U.T. has done, with the assurance that 
its recommended improvements would be 
implemented. The non-striking members of PSA 
consolidated as a department and elected Professor R. 
Wyllie as Acting Chairman, and President Strand on 
14 October suspended the PSA Trusteeship. At the 
same time, and as a result of several approaches by 
individual PSA faculty members who indicated that 
they would like to withdraw from the strike, C.A.U.T. 
attempted to negotiate - or to offer its services in 
negotiating - a possible withdrawal of the strike action 
and of a simultaneous withdrawal of suspension and 
dismissal proceedings as a prelude to further 
negotiation. For that purpose, and because the Central 
Office of C.A.U.T. was receiving numerous requests 
from member associations and from social scientists 
across Canada and the United States for current 
information on the PSA dispute, a 3-man committee 
(President Willard Allen, Professor Hijmans of the 
A.F. & T. Committee, and the Executive Secretary) 
visited Simon Fraser for informal discussions on 20-
22 October. They spoke with the Executive of the 
Simon Fraser Faculty Association, various 
administrators, a great many faculty members, 
including most members of the PSA Department 
present on campus (both from the striking and non-
striking groups), and some graduate students in PSA 
and members of the Executive of the Student Council.
The Joint Faculty of Simon Fraser had by referendum 
voted against an official C.A.U.T. investigation 
(84-121-3), and in favour of an external examiners' 
committee named through the good offices of 
C.A.U.T. and to investigate the ongoing problems of
PSA and to make appropriate recommendations to the 
University (180-28-27). The Executive of the Faculty 
Association also opposed the idea of a C.A.U.T. 
investigation, or of any further C.A.U.T. intervention 
at that time. Further interviews with faculty, 
administrators, and students convinced the visiting 
committee that there was no hope, from either side, 
for attempts at mediation, and that the formally 
established suspension and dismissal procedures 
would have to run their course. C.A.U.T. proposed to 
maintain a watching brief on these procedures.
The five non-striking members of PSA in residence 
during the Fall trimester, under their Acting 
Chairman, requested a delay in the establishment of 
an External Examining Committee on the grounds 
that they were engaged full-time in their attempts to 
reconstruct a department and to reestablish an 
academic programme. While C.A.U.T. did not 
question these motives, it did register some concern 
that there might be no external investigation of the 
PSA situation - neither of past actions nor of its future 
prospects.
As a result of the PSA strike action, a large number of 
classes had been cancelled. Because the strike was 
called some 8 days after the deadline for changing 
academic programmes, the effects were fairly com­ 
plicated. Many students ended with partial 
programmes; others were allowed to register late for 
"accelerated" classes which individual professors in 
other disciplines provided. The picketing of classes 
extended to some outside of PSA, especially of the 
alternate classes referred to above. These were 
picketed as "scab" classes; entrance to them was on 
some occasions barred physically against students and 
teacher. It should be noted that despite misleading 
publicity, no faculty member outside of the PSA 
Department actually joined the strike.
The University obtained against 3 faculty members 
and 11 students a court injunction restraining them 
from interference with classes and from "non-peaceful" 
picketing, and from enjoining others to such actions.
The court injunction also requested damages resulting 
from the strike action.
The question of the original appeals on contract 
renewals or tenure for the PSA faculty who had been 
on strike must by necessity be held in abeyance until 
the conclusion of the procedures presently underway 
on the issues of suspension and dismissal. The 
Committee on Academic Freedom and Tenure will 
reassess their situation at the conclusion of these 
procedures.
During the earlier part of December, 1969, various 
members of the PSA Department were appealing their 
suspension to the Board of Governors of SFU, under 
the provisions of the University Act, and were naming 
arbitrators for the hearings on dismissal, as was the 
University. It is the understanding of C.A.U.T. that an 
internal committee at SFU has been established to 
review and to make recommendations of the A.F. &.T 
Brief, and that the Senate is engaged in an examination 
of the policies related to the nature and limits of 
departmental autonomy.
10 December 1969 
Alwyn Berland 
Executive Secretary 
Originally published in the CAUT Bulletin 
(Winter 1970 edition, pages 42 to 50).
This report has been redesigned.