rt of t
T Ad H
I
E
C
A 
O
nto th
Enb
Corp
At the
October
r 2017
R
C
I
C
A
D
A
D
P
Repor
CAUT 
Into th
Corpo
At the
Ad Ho
he Enb
orate S
e Univ
oc Inv
bridge
Sustai
versity
Dr. Alison 
Associate Pro
Hearn 
ofessor, Univ
versity of We
estern Ontar
rio
Dr. Gus Va
Professor, Os
n Harten 
sgoode Hall
Law School
©
2
© 2017 Canadian A
2705 Queensview
Association of Un
w Drive, Ottawa, O
niversity Teacher
Ontario K2B 8K2 \
rs 
\\ 613-820-2270 \\
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Contents
1| Introduction & Summary of Findings 
2| The Investigatory Committee’s Mandate 
3| Fulfilling the Mandate 
4| Conflict of Interest & the University of Calgary 
5| Implications for Academic Freedom 
6| External Influence, Institutional Autonomy, & Academic Integrity 
7| Inadequate Funding & the Pressure to Raise More Corporate Money 
8| Governance, Institutional Culture, & Academic Leadership 
9| Recommendations 
10| Select References 
Appendices
CAUT Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
1| Introduction & Summary of Findings
Post-secondary institutions serve the common good by 
pursuing, fostering, and disseminating understanding 
and knowledge. To do so, they must embrace and defend 
academic freedom as a foundational principle. Academic 
freedom includes the right to teach, research, engage in 
public debate, and express opinions freely without fear of 
intimidation or reprisal. The failure to protect and 
promote academic freedom imperils a university’s 
autonomy and raison d’être by undermining the ability of 
its faculty to do their work as researchers and teachers. 
Simply put, a university that does not protect and 
promote academic freedom is not truly a university. 
As the Supreme Court of Canada has stated, academic 
staff are expected to meet their responsibilities to their 
students, their disciplines, and the public in a “free and 
fearless” way.1 If their ability to act in this way is 
threatened or abridged, it is a serious matter warranting 
robust investigation and effective remedies. 
In the present case, the Canadian Association of 
University Teachers (CAUT) established an 
Investigatory Committee as a result of an ongoing media 
investigation of the circumstances surrounding the 
establishment of the Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability (ECCS) at the Haskayne School of Business 
(HSB) of the University of Calgary (U of C). This step by 
CAUT was informed by evidence uncovered by 
journalists based largely on information disclosed 
through freedom of information requests. The story first 
1. “…[Faculty members] must have a great measure of security 
 of employment if they are to have the freedom necessary to 
 the maintenance of academic excellence which is or should 
 be the hallmark of a university. Tenure provides the necessary 
 academic freedom to allow free and fearless search for 
 knowledge and the propagation of ideas.” McKinney v. 
 University of Guelph, [1990] 3 SCR 229, 1990 CanLII 60 (SCC).
attracted national attention in November 2015. 
Between March 2011 and July 2012, the U of C worked 
to secure a sponsorship from Enbridge, a major oil and 
gas pipelines company based in Calgary, to establish a 
research institute at the Haskayne School of Business. Dr. 
Joe Arvai, a recently-appointed Haskayne faculty 
member, was asked to be the director of the institute that 
eventually became the ECCS. In this context, Arvai came 
into conflict with the sponsor and his Dean over a 
number of important decisions about the ECCS, 
including the naming of the centre, the choice of its 
partner institutions, and the role of the director. Arvai 
informed us that he was eventually removed from his 
position as director a week after he informed Enbridge’s 
public relations firm of his opposition on scientific 
grounds to the Northern Gateway pipeline. Arvai later 
left the U of C entirely. 
While Dr. Arvai was director of the ECCS, senior 
administrators at the U of C took steps that in our view 
compromised his academic freedom. The compromises 
are especially troubling due to a clear appearance of a 
conflict of interest on the part of U of C President 
Elizabeth Cannon. At the relevant time, Cannon held a 
 seat on an Enbridge board2 and was highly remunerated
2. In a submission to the McMahon review, President Cannon 
 drew a distinction between this board – the Enbridge Income 
 Fund Holdings Board – and Enbridge Inc., while noting that 
 the board was affiliated with and 70% owned by Enbridge Inc. 
 (Statement of Elizabeth Cannon to the McMahon review, 
 December 2, 2015). For present purposes, these 
 circumstances of majority ownership establish clearly that the 
 board and Enbridge Inc. were part of the same business and 
 reasonably understood by University staff and the public to 
 have a shared interest in Enbridge’s corporate reputation. 
 Cannon herself acknowledged as much when she told the 
 HSB Dean in August 2012 that she was “on one of their 
 [Enbridge’s] boards!”
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
in that role. The U of C Board of Governors evidently 
approved this conflicting role without requiring Cannon 
to disclose the conflict publicly and recuse herself from 
Enbridge-related activities at the university. Moreover, 
senior administrators at the U of C, including Cannon, 
intervened directly in the operations of the ECCS. While 
the clearest intervention by Cannon came after Arvai’s 
departure, before his departure the HSB Dean invoked 
the President’ name and the Dean’s understanding of her 
views in the course of putting pressure on Arvai. 
In carrying out our mandate, we examined evidence in 
emails provided in response to a freedom of information 
application by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
(CBC) about the ECCS. Our review of these documents 
was supplemented by communications with a small 
number of current and former faculty at the U of C, one 
or more student representatives at the U of C, and the 
former Dean of HSB. The Committee conducted in-
person interviews on the University campus and at a 
Calgary hotel, and via teleconferences with former U of 
C faculty Dr. David Keith (now at Harvard) and Dr. 
Arvai (now at the University of Michigan). We also 
considered U of C Board policy documents, Board 
Agendas and Minutes posted online, and the report 
produced at the Board’s request by The Honourable 
Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C., a practicing lawyer and 
former Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench, in 
December 2015. 
Among those who spoke to us directly, only Professors 
Keith and Arvai were willing to discuss their views about 
the ECCS for attribution. Interviewees who spoke to us 
off the record expressed concern about possible reprisal, 
the impact on their career prospects, or other negative 
consequences. A story in the National Observer, following 
from the Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee’s visit to the 
U of C campus in April 2016, ascribes similar concerns
to U of C faculty members (Christopher Adams, 
“Teachers investigate whether University of Calgary is in 
bed with Big Oil,” National Observer, 10 August 2016). 
In response to a request to discuss our investigation, 
former HSB Dean Leonard (Len) Waverman stated in 
an email to us on April 20, 2016, that, over his 50-year 
academic career, he has had “an unwavering 
commitment to academic freedom and academic 
integrity.” He also highlighted several provisions in the 
ECCS terms of reference: the ECCS would “provide a 
neutral ground for thoughtful and relevant research, 
analysis and education;” the ECCS academic advisory 
group would include a range of academics, with one 
non-voting spot available for an Enbridge designate; and 
the ECCS external advisory board would include 
representatives of various communities alongside 
academics and an HSB student, with Enbridge selecting 
one member and able to communicate non-binding 
recommendations to the ECCS Director for other 
members. Dr. Waverman also stated that the ECCS 
terms of reference conveyed “what was always the 
intention for the Centre as a neutral, scholarly forum 
with academic freedom firmly in place.” 
Members of the senior administration at U of C and the 
U of C Board of Governors declined to meet or interact 
with our Investigatory Committee despite invitations to 
do so. Dr. Dru Marshall, Vice-President Academic and 
Provost, took the step of alerting U of C faculty and 
senior leadership about our Committee’s planned visit to 
the university campus in April 2016, after we informed 
U of C administrators of the planned visit and requested 
to meet with them. Marshall’s email of March 18, 2016, 
to U of C faculty stated that former Justice McMahon’s 
report had found no wrongdoing in relation to the 
ECCS and that the CAUT Investigatory Committee 
could not compel anyone to talk with its members. In the
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
same message, Marshall also mischaracterized CAUT’s 
position on maintaining the confidentiality of 
participants in its investigations. This intervention was 
an early indication of the U of C administration’s 
unwillingness to discuss issues of substance with the 
Investigatory Committee and of its apparent strategy 
to frustrate or discredit our inquiry. Thus, the U of C 
did not participate constructively in the only formal 
investigation of the ECCS that has been initiated by any 
entity other than the U of C itself. 
On the basis of the evidence before the 
Investigatory Committee, we find:
Conflict of interest 
a) There was a clear appearance of a conflict of interest 
in U of C President Elizabeth Cannon’s serving on the 
Enbridge Income Fund Holdings Board for significant 
remuneration while she was president of the U of C. The 
appearance of a conflict should have been readily 
apparent to anyone who knew of the circumstances, 
despite the fact that contracts governing her first term as 
President and her renewal for a second term, as 
approved by the U of C Board of Governors, explicitly 
entitled Dr. Cannon to sit on external corporate boards 
and be paid for that activity. 
b) The best way for Dr. Cannon to have avoided this 
clearly apparent conflict was for her not to occupy a 
position, especially a paid one, on an external corporate 
board during her tenure as U of C President. At the very 
least, Dr. Cannon should have recused herself publicly 
from all Enbridge-related discussions and decisions at the 
U of C in order to alleviate concerns about her ability to 
influence U of C decision-making in ways that would 
benefit Enbridge. Even if the U of C Board of Governors 
felt that there was some reasonable basis for approving
Dr. Cannon’s dual role, its members should have insisted 
that Dr. Cannon withdraw from any university activities 
that were of an apparent interest to the external boards on 
which she sat or the corporations that paid her in that role. 
c) In the case of the ECCS, Dr. Cannon evidently did 
not recuse herself publicly from such activities. On the 
contrary, she intervened directly and in writing with the 
Dean of the HBS, stating that Enbridge was not happy 
with the progress of the ECCS and that she wanted to 
have a good relationship with Enbridge, emphasizing 
that she was on one of Enbridge’s boards. It is reasonable 
to assume that Dr. Cannon viewed Enbridge’s level of 
happiness as linked to its reputational goals and, 
tangentially, to its capacity to remunerate those serving 
on its boards, including herself.
d) Dr. Cannon’s statement to the McMahon review that, 
during her term as president, “absolutely no business 
related to Enbridge came before the Board of Governors” 
such that “conflict of interest declarations were not 
required” is hard to square with the fact that the Board of 
Governors was itself a party to the sponsorship 
agreement. If this Enbridge-related matter did not come 
before the Board, therefore, it was due to a serious 
governance failure – downplayed by Cannon as an 
“administrative lapse” – of an administration led by 
Cannon herself. Cannon’s reliance on this failure by her 
own administration in order to deny her duty to disclose 
her conflicting role at Enbridge constitutes an 
unacceptable evasion of responsibility. 
e) We think it likely that President Cannon, and clear 
that Board Vice-Chair Bonnie DuPont, had news of the 
Enbridge sponsorship well before the ECCS’ eventual 
launch in March 2012. In any event, as of March 2012 at 
the latest, both Cannon and DuPont should have 
informed the Board of the sponsorship and Cannon 
should have recused herself from any involvement.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
f) The accumulation of the President’s dual role and 
appearance of a conflict of interest, her failure to recuse 
herself publicly, and the Board’s evident approval or 
acquiescence in this conflict and non-recusal amount, in 
our view, led to a significant failure of leadership that 
very likely has harmed the U of C’s reputation for 
academic independence and objectivity. 
g) In the case of the ECCS, these concerns were amplified 
by the presence of one or more current or former 
Enbridge officials on the U of C Board of Governors, 
Dr. Cannon’s high level of remuneration as an Enbridge 
board member, and Enbridge’s sponsorship of and 
involvement in the ECCS. Worse, the President’s clear, 
apparent conflict of interest impinged directly on 
decision-making about the ECCS. 
Academic freedom and external influence 
h) In the culmination of a series of events, Dr. Arvai’s 
academic freedom was compromised as a result of the 
U of C’s mishandling of the Enbridge Centre. This 
mishandling appears to have been due to a desire on 
the part of senior U of C leadership to please a significant 
donor. On repeated occasions, one or more University 
officials who should have been affirming 
and defending Arvai’s academic freedom instead 
undermined it. 
i) Enbridge sought to influence the establishment and 
public launching of the ECCS. On the record before us, 
senior administrators in the HSB and U of C should have 
but did not convey to Enbridge that its attempted 
influence over the Centre was inappropriate. These 
administrators also should have but did not take firm 
and consistent steps to ensure that Enbridge respected 
the authority and obligation of academic staff to 
determine the academic direction of the Centre. These
failures by senior administrators appear to have been 
motivated by a desire to avoid offending the donor. 
j) We found Dr. Arvai’s explanation for his departure as 
ECCS director to be credible and very troubling. Dr. 
Arvai informed us that the then-HSB Dean, Len 
Waverman, phoned him to discuss his removal as 
director one week after Arvai told Enbridge’s public 
relations firm of his opposition on scientific grounds to 
the Northern Gateway pipeline. Arvai told us that the 
public relations firm asked him about the pipeline at a 
meeting in advance of the ECCS’s launch and that the 
question arose because, although “canned” media (which 
we understand to mean media not expected to ask 
awkward or probing questions) would attend the launch, 
other media might also attend and ask about the 
Northern Gateway pipeline. 
k) Even if we put aside the issue of Arvai’s departure 
completely, we think that his academic freedom was 
infringed over the course of his tenure as ECCS director. 
Enbridge was able to make suggestions about the 
Centre’s name and the Centre’s director was pressed 
to accept those suggestions over his academic judgment. 
Enbridge was given special access to the University’s 
academic and other staff to discuss or determine 
academic priorities. Enbridge was allowed to 
recommend partners for the Centre, with pressure 
brought to bear on the Centre’s director to accept them. 
Enbridge was given extensive influence over the 
planning and design of the Centre’s public launch. In 
each of these respects, it should have been apparent to 
University officials that Enbridge had a related public 
relations interest that was in conflict with the Centre’s 
academic mission. Viewed in isolation, some of the 
actions of U of C administrators would not rise to the 
level of an encroachment on academic freedom, but as 
an accumulation, in our view they do.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Management of donations 
l) The Enbridge sponsorship was skewed in Enbridge’s 
favour from the start. The university made unfunded 
promises to Enbridge, including commitments to 
enhance Enbridge’s reputation, at the university’s risk 
and expense. The ECCS’s planned activities were based 
on an annual budget of $500,000, which was more than 
double Enbridge’s financial outlay under the sponsorship 
agreement. Even this originally proposed $500,000 budget 
did not cover the cost of a salary for a full director of the 
ECCS, implying that time committed by Dr. Arvai or 
other full-time academic directors would, at least in part, 
be voluntary or dependent on other University resources. 
m) The funding shortfall was supposed to be made up by 
more fundraising. Specific companies were identified, all 
with operations in the oil and gas industry. As far as we 
can tell from the record, these fundraising efforts were 
unsuccessful, leading eventually to requests that Enbridge 
revisit the ECCS’s mission and design, including its name. 
When the ECCS’s funding constraints became untenable, 
it was the Centre’s directors who were held accountable, 
instead of the administrators who negotiated the skewed 
sponsorship agreement, the Board members who were 
party to it, and the senior U of C leadership who failed to 
exercise proper oversight. 
n) The Enbridge sponsorship reveals how easily a 
university can make itself dependent on corporate 
money. To carry out its plan to meet its commitments to 
Enbridge, the U of C had to raise more money than it 
received from Enbridge in the first place. This liability in 
turn created inherent pressures to compromise academic 
objectivity where it came into conflict with donor 
priorities. Whether intentionally or not, the design of 
the ECCS subordinated the university’s responsibilities 
as an academic body to the priorities of prospective 
donors in the oil and gas industry.
Governance 
o) There appears to have been a significant failure of 
collegial governance, accountability and oversight in the 
establishment of the ECCS. As far as we can tell, the 
Enbridge sponsorship was never vetted beyond the HSB 
Development Office. The Enbridge sponsorship does 
not appear to have come before the U of C Board of 
Governors for approval. There was also a lack of notice 
and discussion of the Enbridge sponsorship in the U of C 
General Faculties Council. These oversights indicate that 
the processes of review and accountability for the ECCS 
were deeply inadequate and constitute a serious 
breakdown of collegial governance. 
p) Based on our review of the ECCS and wider media 
reports, there are worrying signs of a culture of silencing 
and reprisal at the U of C.
The McMahon Review 
q) The U of C has relied repeatedly on the report of 
former Justice McMahon to excuse conduct of its senior 
administrators in relation to the ECCS. Yet McMahon’s 
report and conclusions are undermined by his limited 
acknowledgement and consideration of the role of 
academic freedom at universities and in relation to the 
ECCS in particular. The conclusions he reached also 
appear to us to have given significant benefit of the 
doubt to senior U of C officials. In contrast, two named 
individuals, Joe Arvai and Len Waverman, appear not to 
have received a similar benefit of the doubt and were the 
subject of damaging criticism by McMahon. 
r) It was also misleading for the U of C Board of 
Governors, in a press release on November 19, 2015, 
to have described the McMahon review as “independent” 
and as reflecting “an open and transparent process.”
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
The McMahon review was not fully independent of the 
Board and was not open and transparent with respect 
to the supporting evidence for McMahon’s conclusions. 
Finally, the review process, especially its selective 
approach to confidentiality, was, in our view, inconsistent 
with principles of fairness and thoroughness. (See 
Appendix A for our detailed commentary on the 
McMahon report). 
At the conclusion of this report, we make 
recommendations based on these findings.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
2| The Investigatory Committee’s Mandate
The Canadian Association of University Teachers 
established the Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee to look 
into alleged violations of academic freedom and conflict 
of interest at the University of Calgary. The Committee’s 
mandate was as follows: 
a) Examine allegations of conflict of interest, violations 
of academic freedom, and inappropriate external 
interference surrounding the establishment and 
operations of the Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability at the University of Calgary; 
b) Investigate the circumstances involving the departure 
of the first Director of the Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability to determine if his academic 
freedom was violated;
c) Consider other issues related to conflict of interest, 
governance, academic freedom, and the management of 
donations at the University of Calgary that may arise in 
the course of the investigation; and, 
d) Make appropriate recommendations. 
The Committee operated under the CAUT Procedures 
in Academic Freedom Cases. It was tasked with 
gathering relevant documentation and arranging to meet 
with appropriate persons in order to obtain a full and fair 
understanding of the facts.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
3| Fulfilling the Mandate
As described in the Executive Summary above, the 
Investigatory Committee attempted to contact key 
participants at the U of C, or formerly at the U of C, in 
order to learn as much as possible about the relevant 
facts. We focused our review on the U of C itself and 
decided not to involve Enbridge or other private 
companies or parties, other than former Justice 
McMahon and the U of C’s outside legal counsel. We 
considered Enbridge’s conduct and objectives regarding 
the ECCS based solely on the record before us, especially 
the Memorandum of Agreement between Enbridge and 
the U of C, email communications between Enbridge 
staff and U of C staff, and public statements by Enbridge 
about the ECCS. 
The Committee sought to speak with as many people as 
possible who were directly involved in the establishment 
of the ECCS. The Committee specifically contacted 
senior U of C administrators and offered to meet with 
them during the Committee’s visit to the U of C in 
March 2016. Members of the senior administration, 
including former Board member Bonnie DuPont and 
President Elizabeth Cannon, declined to meet with us, as 
did members of the U of C staff who were involved in 
establishing the sponsorship agreement and the ECCS 
itself, such as HSB Director of Development Kim Kadatz. 
As discussed in Appendix A, steps were taken to seek 
access to the information provided by the U of C to the 
McMahon review. No information was provided by 
former Justice McMahon, the University Board, or the 
University leadership in this respect. Some information 
was provided by the U of C in response to a freedom of 
information request by the Committee, but it did not 
include the full range of important information 
submitted to the McMahon review, including interview 
statements by senior administrators.
After reviewing the evidence and completing an initial 
drafting process for our report, notices of potential 
findings of misconduct by the Committee were sent to 
various U of C administrators. No response was received 
on any substantive issue raised in these notices or 
otherwise in relation to the U of C’s handling of the 
ECCS. Rather, the Chair of the U of C Board of 
Governors, Gordon M. Ritchie, replied to several of the 
notices by raising process-related objections to the 
Committee’s investigation and alleging bias on the part 
of the Committee chair, Professor Len Findlay, based on 
statements Findlay gave to a public audience about the 
conduct of U of C administrators in relation to the ECCS. 
These statements were given without the knowledge of 
Professors Hearn and Van Harten and did not reflect 
their views or those of the Committee. Out of respect for 
Mr. Ritchie’s concern and with an abundance of caution, 
Hearn and Van Harten asked Findlay to resign from the 
Committee, and he agreed to do so. Further, Hearn and 
Van Harten committed to reviewing the report and its 
findings in their entirety. Informed of these steps, 
Ritchie maintained that they were insufficient and 
declined, on behalf of several of the notified senior 
administrators, to engage with any of the substantive 
issues raised by our findings. Ritchie maintained that the 
proper and legitimate review of the ECCS was the 
McMahon review, not the present Committee. We have 
included our relevant correspondence with Mr. Ritchie 
in Appendix G of this report. 
While it would have been useful to hear directly from 
these and other officials and staff on matters of substance 
related to the ECCS and to access the full record 
provided as part of the McMahon review, we are 
confident in the findings and recommendations that we 
have made based on other sources, including interviews
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
with current or former members of the U of C 
community and an extensive written record produced 
in response to freedom of information requests. If we 
gain access to further information and that information 
warrants further action or further recommendations, the 
Investigatory Committee will produce a supplement to 
the current report.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
4| Conflict of Interest at the University of Calgary
Since at least 1987, the University of Calgary, like other 
universities, has had policies in place regarding conflict 
of interest (University of Calgary Code of Conduct 10: 
“History”). For the events of concern in the present 
review, the most relevant policy is the U of C Board of 
Governors’ Conflict of Interest Policy enacted January 1, 
2006, which has as one of its purposes to “preserve and 
enhance public confidence in the integrity, objectivity 
and impartiality of the decision-making processes” of the 
Board and its Committees. We examine the relevance 
of that policy below. As a further reference, we also 
consider the current University Code of Conduct of 
January 1, 2015, and a related Code of Conduct for 
members of the U of C Board of Governors. These 
documents attest to the responsibilities of Board 
members and the possibility that the Board offers a 
necessary but potentially problematic interface between 
the University and external constituencies. For example, 
the codes are intended to “provide a framework to guide 
ethical conduct of Members in a way that upholds the 
integrity and reputation of the Board and the University” 
and specify that the Board “operates within the public 
trust and strives to achieve the highest ethical conduct in 
all of its operations.” Board members “are expected to 
behave in a way that aligns with this Code and the 
University Code,” although the codes “do not cover every 
specific scenario” so that members “are expected to use 
both the wording, and spirit and intent behind the Codes 
to guide their conduct.” 
These documents on conflicts of interest provide useful 
reference points for evaluating the appropriateness of 
the conduct of the U of C Board and its senior 
administrators in relation to the Enbridge Centre. We 
focus in particular on Dr. Cannon’s conflicting role as, 
on the one hand, the U of C president and a U of C
Board member and, on the other hand, a paid Enbridge 
board member. In our view, Cannon’s conduct was not 
consistent with the norms and values expressed in the 
Board’s Policy of January 1, 2006, or with the more 
recent codes noted above. Regardless of which of these 
documents apply to Cannon in the relevant period, it is 
clear that Cannon and the U of C Board failed to take 
appropriate steps to avoid the actual or apparent conflicts 
arising from her dual role. 
While President Cannon informed former Justice 
McMahon that she was “minimally” involved in the 
Enbridge Centre and that the “touchstone” for her 
involvement was the Centre’s public launch in late 
March 20123, as we discuss below, her level of 
involvement in the Centre was more than minimal. 
Even if she had not involved herself in the Centre at all, 
her conflicting role and failure to recuse herself publicly 
from Enbridge-related activities at the U of C still posed 
a serious problem. In our view, Cannon’s known 
connections to Enbridge gave a reasonable basis for all 
U of C administrators and staff to assume that the 
President would prefer it if they worked to appease 
Enbridge in their decision-making. As an illustration, 
the Haskayne BS Dean, Len Waverman, conveyed such a 
message to Joseph Arvai in early March 2012, after Arvai 
had expressed concerns about Enbridge’s role. 
Waverman told Arvai that “(p)utting these issues in 
writing… jeopardizes our relationship with Enbridge” 
and that “Elizabeth [Cannon] will have a fit if she sees 
this” (Email of March 8, 2012). This example 
demonstrates that Cannon was “involved” in the 
Enbridge Centre throughout her term as president 
because of the power of her office and the message that
3. Statement of Elizabeth Cannon [to the McMahon review], 
December 2, 2015.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
her conflicting role potentially sent to others at the 
university.
Examples of Supporting Material from the Factual 
Record Regarding Concerns that Enbridge May Be 
Using the ECCS as a Public Relations Vehicle:
They [Enbridge officials] feel they were charged with coming 
up with a plan they feel will maximize PR for Enbridge. We 
have caused them to rethink…
— Email from Kim Kadatz, HSB to Dean Waverman of HSB,
May 3, 2011
We need to be careful so as not to position the Centre as a 
vehicle for public relations for Enbridge.
— Email from Kim Kadatz, to Dean Waverman and Joe Arvai,
December 19, 2011
I am becoming increasingly uneasy again about how Enbridge 
is viewing the centre, namely (as Kim mentions) as a PR 
vehicle for the company…. I cannot and will not be able to run 
the centre that way…. There’s a widely held perception that the 
U of C is in the pocket of industry. We have a chance to correct 
that with this centre….
— Email from Joe Arvai, HSB faculty member and ECCS Director, to
Len Waverman, HSB Dean, and Kim Kadatz, December 19, 2011
It sounds to me like a classic case of ‘he who pays the piper calls 
the tunes’…. Enbridge is doing too much tune calling, in my 
view, to the point that the Centre’s usefulness to HSB academics 
is being sacrificed to Enbridge’s PR objectives. The most brazen 
of this approach is the altering of the IRIS name itself…. The 
Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability…. smacks of 
us being apologists for the fossil fuel industry rather than 
independent scholars and teachers doing work in a broadly 
defined area. We built IRIS over 17 years now with strong 
industry support without being seen as industry apologists. I’m 
concerned that we may have stepped over the line….
— Email from Harrie Vredenburg, HSB faculty member, to Len
Waverman, August 26, 2011
Enbridge has been difficult – especially their [public relations] 
firm who were trying to use events to buttress Enbridge’s name 
with little insight into the academic needs to be distant and to 
run the Centre as we see fit….
— Email from Len Waverman, HSB Dean, to Elizabeth Cannon,
President of the U of C and Dru Marshall, U of C Provost, August 23, 
 2012
Based on the U of C policy and codes, it is plain and 
obvious that Dr. Cannon’s appointment to an Enbridge 
board created a conflict of interest with her role as U of 
C President and Board member. In turn, Cannon, as 
President, should have been strictly required to operate 
at arm’s length from Enbridge-associated projects at U of 
C. In the case of the 2006 policy in effect when she was 
hired as President two years later, a “Conflict of Duty” is 
defined to include circumstances in which a Board or 
committee member “has or appears to have” a conflict 
between their duties to act “in the best interests of the 
University” and their actual or apparent duties “because 
of another role and/or Private Interest.” In the 
circumstances of the ECCS, it is clear that Cannon’s 
actual or apparent duties as an Enbridge board member 
created or appeared to create a conflict with the best 
interests of the U of C, especially its obligation and 
efforts to maintain its reputation for independent 
research at a U of C centre that was funded by and of 
interest to Enbridge. Further, the 2006 Policy defines a 
“Conflict of Interest” as resulting from “a situation or 
circumstances involving a Private Interest” that is 
sufficient to influence, or appear to influence, a Board 
member’s exercise of an official power or performance of 
an official duty. Cannon’s remuneration as an Enbridge 
board member clearly falls within the Policy’s notion of a 
“Private Interest,” meaning “a corporate, financial 
personal or private affiliation, relationship or 
involvement” that is “outside the scope” of Cannon’s 
appointment to the Board and service on Board
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
committees. Whether her dual role is treated as a conflict 
of duty, a conflict of interest, or both, Dr. Cannon is 
required under the policy to “maintain an arm’s length 
separation” between her Enbridge relationship and her 
official functions as U of C president.4 
This assessment is supported by U of C codes, which, 
since January 1, 2015, have stated that a “Conflict of 
Interest” exists when “an individual takes part in a 
decision in the course of carrying out their University 
responsibilities, where they know or ought to know that 
the decision may result in a real or perceived Private 
Benefit to them or to a Related Person or Related Entity” 
or when “an individual uses their position with the 
University to influence or seek to influence a University 
decision which they know or ought to know may result 
in a real or perceived Private Benefit to a Related Person 
or Related Entity.” There is no reasonable basis to doubt 
that Dr. Cannon’s appointment at Enbridge qualifies as a 
“Private Benefit,” meaning “a financial or personal 
benefit,” and that Enbridge was a “Related Entity,” a 
major corporation with several related internal boards, 
including an Income Fund Holdings Board whose 
members, including Cannon herself, stood to benefit 
from Cannon’s intervention regarding the ECCS. On 
this basis, we think it clear that Cannon was in a specific 
situation of appearance of conflict when, as U of C 
President, she intervened in U of C decision-making 
4. It is unclear to us why Dr. Cannon’s statement to Dean 
 Waverman that she served on an Enbridge board was 
 evidently redacted from emails provided by the U of C in 
 response to FOIP requests. We encountered this statement by 
 Cannon only in the McMahon Report and, as discussed in 
 Appendix A, are not persuaded by former Justice McMahon’s 
 assessment that “no negative inference can be reasonably 
 drawn” from Dr. Cannon’s eventual resignation from the 
 Enbridge Income Fund Holdings Board.
relating to the ECCS. More broadly, she was in a general 
conflict when, as the U of C President, she also served 
and was paid lucratively as an Enbridge board member.5 
A university president plays a crucial role in institutional 
governance. In President Cannon’s case, she has had 
membership on all eight of the Board’s standing 
committees and voting privileges on six of them, 
including the Board’s Executive Committee but 
excluding its Audit Committee and its Human Resources 
and Governance Committee. In the latter two settings, 
the president is a non-voting ex officio member. In these 
various roles, the president plays a central part in 
determining policies and making decisions at the U of C. 
With that role comes a responsibility for the president to 
recuse herself from Board deliberations when she has, or 
may reasonably appear to have, a conflict of interest. 
When she became President of the U of C, Dr. Cannon 
had been serving on the Enbridge Income Fund 
Holdings Board for six years, four of these as Dean of 
Engineering at the U of C. She continued in this 
remunerated role as President and was permitted to do 
so in her contract with the U of C Board of Governors 
(discussed below). In the circumstances, it would be 
expected that Cannon recuse herself publicly from any U 
of C matters involving Enbridge when they came before 
the Board or the president’s office. We found no 
evidence in the minutes of the Board’s open sessions that 
Cannon recused herself from such matters. The issue 
apparently did not arise at various stages when it might, 
and indeed ought to, have arisen: at the time of the
5. President Cannon stepped down from this Enbridge board in 
 November 2015 in response, as she put it, “to the Media 
 coverage and my concern over public misconceptions.” —
Statement of Elizabeth Cannon [to the McMahon review], 
 December 2, 2015
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Enbridge sponsorship, at the time of the establishment of 
the ECCS, at the time of the signing of a Memorandum 
of Agreement stipulating the name of the new entity and 
the conditions to be met by both parties to the 
agreement, and at any other times in the operation of 
ECCS when Cannon became aware of Enbridge’s 
concerns or suggestions about the ECCS. This evident 
lack of recusal may have arisen in part because the 
Enbridge sponsorship agreement that led to the ECCS, 
unlike similar agreements, was not brought before the U 
of C Board for approval. 
We remain unclear as to why Board approval was not 
sought and are struck and troubled by what appears to 
have been a serious oversight in university governance. 
Nonetheless there is nothing in the record before us to 
suggest that the Board would have withheld approval of 
the sponsorship agreement. The primary question in our 
minds is why President Cannon did not identify herself 
publicly to the Board at relevant times as being in a 
conflict of interest with respect to the ECCS, or, at least, 
appearing to be in a conflict of interest because of the 
reputational benefits that the ECCS promised to bring to 
Enbridge. 
Disclosure is key to providing reassurances about 
apparent conflicts of interest. In this respect, the U of C 
Board’s Policy of January 1, 2006, required Board 
members “to disclose immediately all Private Interests 
that could compete with” their functions and duties as 
Board members. The Board’s agenda regularly includes a 
prominent item called “Conflict of Interest” and Board 
members may speak to this item early in the Board’s 
open session or later in the Board’s closed sessions. For 
the Board’s open sessions, conflicts are recorded from 
time to time in Board minutes that are available online 
from February 2010 onwards. Our review identified no 
evidence in these minutes that President Cannon made 
any declaration of a conflict in the Board’s open sessions
after she joined the Board as a voting member on 
October 8, 2010.6 We find this lack of public disclosure 
about her conflicting role at Enbridge deeply troubling. 
President Cannon informed the McMahon review that 
she had been a member of the Enbridge Income Fund 
Holdings Board since 2003, that she “disclosed this fact 
each and every year,” that her membership on this board 
was within the terms of her U of C contract, and that it 
was “consistently disclosed by [her] to the [U of C] 
Board of Governors.”7 We were unable to ask Cannon 
pertinent questions arising from these statements, 
including how her membership on the Enbridge board 
was disclosed, whether she acknowledged that it created 
a conflict of interest regarding Enbridge-related activities 
at the U of C, whether the conflict was disclosed publicly, 
and whether Cannon committed to recusing herself 
from Enbridge-related activities at the U of C due to the 
conflicting role. We found no evidence on the record 
before us, including the McMahon report, which 
answered these questions. Most importantly, we found 
no evidence that Cannon publicly disclosed her
6. At that time, Bonnie DuPont – a former group vice-president 
 at Enbridge and then-Chair of the Board’s Human Resources 
 and Governance Committee (HRGC) – advised the Board “that 
 providing voting privileges to the President [Dr. Cannon] is 
 standard practice” (Board Minutes for October 8, 2010, item 
 7b). In fact, this practice was a departure from the immediate 
 past practice, as prescribed in the preceding version of the 
 HRGC’s Terms of Reference, with relevant revisions brought to 
 the Board for approval at its meeting of October 8, 2010. The 
 change may reflect the transition from an acting president to 
 a full-time one and appears consistent with the role of Dr. 
 Cannon’s full-time predecessors as president of the U of C. 
7. Statement of Elizabeth Cannon (to the McMahon review), 
 December 2, 2015.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
conflicting role on the Enbridge board and that she 
committed to recusing herself from Enbridge-related 
activities at the university. 
In her submission to the McMahon review, President 
Cannon stated that she “fully disclosed” her “involvement” 
with the Enbridge Income Fund Holdings Board “at all 
times.”8 Remarkably to us, she also stated that, during 
her term as President, “absolutely no business related to 
Enbridge came before the Board of Governors” such that 
“conflict of interest declarations were not required.”9 In 
these statements Cannon implies that she did not 
acknowledge to the Board of Governors that she had a 
conflict of interest with respect to Enbridge when she 
disclosed her membership on the Enbridge board. Thus, 
both she and the Board of Governors saw no reason for 
her to recuse herself from Enbridge-related activities. 
However, we find it hard to square Cannon’s statement 
that “no business related to Enbridge” came before the 
Board of Governors during her presidency with the fact 
of Enbridge’s sponsorship of the ECCS, especially when 
the sponsorship agreement itself, dated July 1, 2011, 
states explicitly that is an agreement between Enbridge 
and “The Governors of the University of Calgary.” How 
can the U of C Board of Governors, in whose name the 
sponsorship agreement with Enbridge was concluded, 
not have undertaken any business with respect to that 
agreement? 
If Cannon’s statement is accurate and this Enbridge-
related matter did not come before the U of C Board, it 
reflected a serious governance failure – downplayed by
8. Ibid. 
9. Ibid.
Cannon as an “administrative lapse”10 – of an 
administration led by Cannon herself. In the 
circumstances, we do not understand how Dr. Cannon, 
as President and a Board member, was totally unaware of 
Enbridge’s sponsorship for almost a year, as she told 
McMahon. We think it more likely that news of a 
sponsorship by such a prominent company would have 
found its way to Cannon as well as to Bonnie DuPont, 
who was then Vice-Chair of the Board. In either case, it 
was Cannon’s or DuPont’s duty to see that the Board was 
informed of the sponsorship and, in Cannon’s case, to 
recuse herself from any involvement. We find support 
for our view of when President Cannon was in a 
position to become aware of the sponsorship in these 
details from the record: 
Concerning Elizabeth Cannon: 
 HSB Director of Development Kim Kadatz stated in
April 2011 that the President had arranged her 
schedule for an ECCS launch date of May 18, 2011. 
 Kadatz later canvassed the President’s office regarding
her availability for a new ECCS launch date on July 25, 
2011, which was “the 1st anniversary of [Enbridge’s] 
spill in Michigan,” noting that “the gift announced at 
that time will offer more public relations value for 
them” (Email of April 27, 2011).
10. Ibid (“Normally, a donation or sponsorship proposal for the 
 naming of a Centre is tabled before the executive leadership 
 team for review, and then for approval by the Board of 
 Governors…. It appears from my review that those 
 responsible [Development] failed to take these steps. In 
 looking into the reasons why, I am satisfied that the oversight 
 was simply an administrative lapse.”).
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
 Kadatz and others at the U of C canvassed additional
dates for the President’s availability in October and 
November 2011 for the postponed ECCS launch 
(Emails of August 11, 12, 16, and 18, 2011). 
 It was conveyed to Joe Arvai in August 2011 that the
President’s office had said that “Enbridge is very keen” 
about an ECCS launch date of November 3, 2011, 
that the President was booked for that date, and that 
it was “really important” for Arvai to attend the event. 
He committed to doing so by re-arranging his 
schedule (Emails of August 22, 2011). 
 Kadatz prepared a draft “Event Memo” for an ECCS
launch planned for November 10, 2011. The memo 
referred to President Cannon as the host of the event, 
indicated that she would greet Enbridge guests and 
make the opening remarks, and specified as an 
objective of the event to “[p]rovide meaningful 
recognition and acknowledgement to Enbridge.” 
 Kadatz canvassed additional dates for the President’s
availability in January and February 2012 for the 
further-postponed ECCS launch (Email of September 
30, 2011). In December, Kadatz stated that the 
President was booked for a launch date on February 
8, 2012 (Email of December 21, 2011). Kadatz later 
canvassed the President’s availability for other 
launch dates in late February 2012 (Email of January 
10, 2012). 
 Kadatz stated in February 2012 that she would share
the event plan for the launch, which was by then set 
for March 27, with Elizabeth Cannon’s office in order 
to get started with her speech writing (Email of 
February 23, 2012). 
 HSB Dean Len Waverman stated in March 2012 that
he was tired of dealing with Joe Arvai and that 
“Elizabeth will have a fit if she sees this,” evidently
referring to an email string in which an Enbridge 
official raised concerns about Arvai notifying him 
of his concerns about the ECCS (Email of March 8, 
2012). 
 Waverman told Arvai in March 2012 that “Elizabeth
is going to take my head off,” while telling Arvai 
he was being too pushy and jeopardizing their 
relationship with Enbridge (Voicemail of March 8, 
2012). 
Concerning Bonnie DuPont: 
 Waverman stated in June 2011 that Bonnie DuPont,
then Vice-Chair of the U of C Board of Governors, 
would “intervene for us at Enbridge” regarding the 
name of the ECCS (Email of June 4, 2011). 
 Kadatz stated in July 2011 that DuPont “was critical in
obtaining this commitment [to the ECCS 
sponsorship] from Enbridge” (Email of July 22, 2011). 
 DuPont stated to U of C administrators in July 2011
that it was “great news” that the Enbridge deal was 
done and that she had been informed separately by 
Enbridge of this result (Email of July 27, 2011). 
 Kadatz’s draft event memo for the ECCS launch
included Bonnie DuPont as an attendee in her 
capacity as Vice-Chair of the Board (Email and 
attachment of September 20, 2011). 
 Waverman told Bonnie DuPont in October 2011
that Enbridge was “upset” and had pulled the ECCS 
launch planned for November 10 and that he was 
concerned “the $$ are at risk.” He asked DuPont 
whether she could be the ECCS director, with Dr. 
Arvai as academic advisor. She declined on the basis 
that she was on the U of C Board (Emails of October 
20, 2011).
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
 Joe Arvai stated in December 2011 that DuPont was
confirmed as a member of the ECCS external 
advisory board (Email of December 15, 2011). 
 Kadatz stated in March 2012 that President Cannon
had chosen Bonnie DuPont as Cannon’s back-up for 
the ECCS launch on March 27 (March 18, 2012). 
These aspects of the record support the view that 
Cannon likely learned of the Enbridge sponsorship, and 
that DuPont was clearly aware of the sponsorship, well 
before the ECCS’s public launch in March 2012. 
Regardless of whether Cannon was aware of the ECCS 
before that date, both her conduct and that of DuPont 
reveal a failure of leadership and disregard for U of C 
governance processes. Ultimately, the failure precluded 
the Board from reviewing and approving the 
sponsorship agreement, to which it was a party, and 
from taking steps to ensure that Cannon recused herself 
from any decisions related to the ECCS. Cannon’s 
further reliance on the excuse of an “administrative lapse” 
by her own administration, in order to deny her duty to 
disclose her conflicting role at Enbridge, comprises an 
unacceptable evasion of responsibility. 
Simply, President Cannon should have put her role on 
the Enbridge Income Fund Holdings Board on the open 
record and recused herself accordingly from Enbridge-
related activities at the university. These would have 
been steps toward alleviating reasonable concerns that 
Cannon’s Enbridge role conflicted with her role as U of 
C President. Disclosure of real and potential conflicts of 
interest by senior officials is a crucial first step in any 
effort to protect a university’s reputation and ensure 
public confidence in its capacity for independent 
research and teaching. President Cannon and the U of C 
Board as a whole should have been attuned to this issue, 
considering, for example, earlier reports about Bruce
Carson and his tenure at the Canada School of Energy 
and Environment, where Carson was allegedly involved 
in well-paid influence peddling for the oil and gas industry 
and was ultimately convicted of illegal lobbying.11 Board 
members may also have been aware that students use 
expressions such as “Oilsands U” to describe the U of C 
and its ties to the oil and gas industry and, as Dr. Arvai 
put it when raising concerns about the ECCS, “[t]here’s a 
widely held perception out there that the U of C is in the 
pocket of industry” (Email of December 19, 2011). If 
Board members and senior administrators are unaware 
or dismissive of these types of criticisms of the U of C, 
we question whether they are fulfilling their role to 
protect the university’s academic reputation. 
As president of the U of C, Dr. Cannon was operating 
under a contract signed in 2010 and renewed in 2014, 
which included the following clause (at 3.1): 
Dr. Cannon shall devote the whole of her working time, 
attention and ability to the affairs of the University and shall 
faithfully serve and use her best efforts to promote the interests 
of the University. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, Dr. Cannon 
may hold appointments to the Boards of organizations as 
requested by the University in addition to accepting up to two 
(2) appointments to Board(s) or holding similar part-time 
position(s), which are outside the University sphere and for 
personal compensation, provided the same is approved, in 
advance, by the Executive Committee of the Board, such 
approval not to be unreasonably withheld. 
This provision is problematic in several respects. First, it 
commits the whole of Cannon’s time and attention to
11. Greg Weston, CBC News, October 11, 2011; “Bruce Carson, 
 former Harper aide, fined $50,000 for illegal lobbying,” 
 Canadian Press, November 4, 2016.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
“promot[ing] the interests of the university,” yet it also 
allows her to maintain appointments to boards where 
representation is requested by “the University,” and 
allows her to maintain up to two board memberships of 
her choosing for personal compensation. The 
requirement for the Board’s Executive Committee to 
approve such positions offers some reassurance, but it 
does not adequately address the corresponding conflicts 
of interest that may arise. Also, the notion of such service 
occurring “outside the University sphere” is complicated 
by the make-up of the Board, whose members often 
have dual roles traversing the corporate and university 
domains. Finally, it is unclear what it means for the 
Executive Committee to “unreasonably withhold” 
approval of an outside board position. 
Considering the U of C’s policies on conflict of interest 
and the above clause of President Cannon’s contract with 
the U of C, we do not understand how it can be 
reasonable or proper to allow a highly compensated 
university president to earn additional generous 
remuneration in roles that may lead to dual loyalties to 
the university and an outside company. The appearance 
of a conflict should have been obvious to anyone who 
knew of Cannon’s role on the Enbridge board and her 
compensation for that role. The best way for Cannon to 
have avoided this conflict was for her not to occupy a 
position, especially a paid one, on an external corporate 
board during her tenure as U of C President. At the very 
least, Cannon should have recused herself publicly from 
all Enbridge-related discussions and decisions at the U of 
C in order to alleviate concerns about her ability to 
influence U of C decision-making in ways that benefited 
Enbridge. Even if the U of C Board of Governors felt 
that there was some reasonable basis for approving 
Cannon’s dual role, its members should have insisted 
that Cannon withdraw from any university activities of 
interest to the external boards on which she sat or the
corporations that paid her in that role. In the case of the 
ECCS, Cannon evidently did not recuse herself publicly 
from such activities, as exemplified by her direct 
intervention with the Dean of the HBS in which she 
informed him that Enbridge was not happy with the 
progress of the ECCS and that she wanted to have a good 
relationship with Enbridge, stressing that she was on one 
of Enbridge’s boards. 
The accumulation of President Cannon’s dual role and 
conflict of interest, her failure to recuse herself publicly 
at relevant times, and the Board of Governors’ evident 
approval or acquiescence in the conflict and non-recusal 
in our view amounts to a significant failure of leadership 
that very likely has harmed the U of C’s reputation for 
academic independence and objectivity.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
5| Implications for Academic Freedom
Academic freedom is key to the effective, ethical 
functioning of a university, a principle that is reflected in 
the CAUT’s Policy Statement on Academic Freedom 
(Appendix C). This CAUT statement is clearer and more 
uncompromising than the one produced by the 
Association of Universities and Colleges Canada (AUCC, 
which is now Universities Canada [UC]; for a detailed 
critique of the AUCC/UC document see CAUT’s “Open 
Letter” on the topic in Appendix D) in 2011. The 
AUCC/ UC statement of November 2011 nonetheless 
affirms that academic freedom goes beyond the concept 
of free speech in that it “allows universities to set their 
research and educational priorities” and “must be based 
on institutional integrity, rigorous standards for 
enquiry[,] and institutional autonomy.” 
Limiting ourselves to the AUCC/ UC statement of 2011, 
in our view Dr. Joe Arvai’s academic freedom was 
compromised as a result of the U of C’s mishandling 
of the Enbridge Centre. This mishandling appears to 
have been due to a desire on the part of senior U of C 
leadership to please a significant donor. The 
compromising of Arvai’s academic freedom unfolded 
as follows. (See also the Chronology in Appendix B.) 
Examples of Supporting Material from the Factual
Record Regarding U of C Administrators’ Efforts to 
Appease Enbridge:
It is Enbridge’s strong preference through Steve Wuori that the 
university for the partnership…be Central Michigan 
University. That university gave Enbridge and Steve very 
valuable advice on the situation they were dealing with last 
summer and Steve has stated this is his choice….
— Email from Kim Kadatz, HSB Director of Development, to Dean
Waverman of HSB and Joe Arvai, Director of ECCS, April 13, 2011
On reflection, it does make sense that we include mention in 
Pat’s [Pat Daniels, Enbridge CEO] remarks given the
connection made to CMU during the Michigan incident [an 
Enbridge pipeline spill into the Kalamazoo River]….
— Email from Dan O’Grady, Enbridge National Manager of
Community Partnerships and Investment, to Russ Peters, cc’d 
 Kim Kadatz, Joe Arvai, and others, February 2, 2012 
… they [Enbridge] will be postponing any announcement [of 
the Centre] from May 18 until July 25 which is the first 
anniversary of their spill in Michigan. This gift announced at 
that time will offer more public relations value for them.
— Email from Kim Kadatz to Kira DeVries, cc’d to Len Waverman, Joe
Arvai, and others, April 27, 2011 
Dan [O’Grady] and I agreed that we need to iron out the name 
and focus before we jump to an announcement. This is very 
important for us and them but they don't like to be pushed and 
we will need to take direction from them on timing.
— Email from Kim Kadatz to Len Waverman, HSB Dean, May 3, 2011 
I like the Enbridge name [for the Centre] or Joe’s… don't want 
to get in the way of the gift – take Dan [O’Grady]’s name!
— Email from Len Waverman to Joe Arvai, ECCS Director, and Kim
Kadatz, May 4, 2011
Early in his career at the U of C, Dr. Arvai was 
introduced as a “real star” by Leonard Waverman, the 
Dean of the Haskayne Business School, in a 
communication to an Enbridge official responsible for 
Community Partnerships and Investment (Email of 
March 28, 2011). After a relatively short time period, 
however, Waverman came to describe Arvai as an 
“amazing ego and royal pain” (Email of July 3, 2012). 
From the email record, it appears that Waverman’s 
evaluation of Arvai evolved in this way because, as 
academic director of the Enbridge Centre, Arvai refused 
to compromise his views about the core academic role 
of the Centre. In a chronology and commentary that
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Arvai wrote and shared with us, he argued that his 
academic freedom could have operated to Enbridge’s 
advantage: 
I told Len [Waverman] at one point early on, that having 
someone like me who opposed NGP [the Northern Gateway 
Pipeline] as the director of the Enbridge Centre would be a 
coup for Enbridge. My reasoning was that it would 
demonstrate how committed to scholarship Enbridge was, and 
that the creation of the Enbridge Centre was not a stunt 
designed to garner goodwill for NGP. 
Yet, the email record demonstrates that senior university 
officials were willing to adjust the university’s research 
and educational priorities according to Enbridge’s 
requests concerning partner institutions, the naming of 
the Centre, the definition of its research agenda and 
outputs, the development of the protocol and agenda for 
the Centre’s launch, and the determination of the kinds 
of professional invitations the Centre’s academic director 
could accept. On various occasions when Arvai took a 
different position from Enbridge, he came into conflict 
with the U of C’s senior leadership. 
An example of how Dr. Arvai’s academic freedom as the 
Centre’s director was compromised can be found in the 
process for selecting academic partners for the ECCS. 
Arvai was told that Enbridge wanted the University of 
Northern British Columbia (UNBC) and Central 
Michigan University (CMU) as collaborating institutions 
with the ECCS. He was understandably skeptical about 
Enbridge’s motives, considering that UNBC was on the 
proposed path for the Northern Gateway pipeline 
promoted by Enbridge, and CMU was one of the closest 
universities to the Enbridge oil spill of July, 2010, into 
the Kalamazoo River in Marshall, Michigan. Arvai was 
concerned about the academic implications of these 
proposed collaborations. CMU, for example, had only 
one faculty member working in the area of corporate
sustainability and no resources to commit. Collaboration 
with them made little sense academically. The email 
record indicates that Enbridge’s “strong preference” was 
for CMU to be chosen because it gave them “very 
valuable advice on the situation they were dealing with 
last summer” (Email of April 13, 2011). In spite of his 
repeated objections, Arvai was pressured into accepting 
CMU as a collaborator. His concerns arose again when 
Enbridge pressured him to include a CMU 
representative on the ECCS’s external advisory board in 
addition to their designated member as per the 
sponsorship agreement. In response to Arvai’s concerns, 
Dean Waverman told him that “(Steve) Wuori 
(Executive Vice-President at Enbridge) will be upset” and 
that Arvai “needs to go along with Enbridge (since) the 
monies we give to CMU are tiny – it won’t be viewed as 
a payoff” (Emails of March 7, 2012 and March 8, 2012). 
Waverman added that Arvai’s “(p)utting these issues in 
writing… jeopardizes our relationship with Enbridge” 
and that “Elizabeth [Cannon] will have a fit if she sees 
this” (Email of March 8, 2012). Thus, Arvai’s ability to 
direct the Centre’s scholarly mission, including the 
assurance that its mission would not be driven by 
Enbridge’s public relations interests, was directly 
undermined by a more senior administrator who 
expressed concern about appeasing President Cannon 
and a donor with whom Cannon was personally and 
financially connected. 
Another compromise of Dr. Arvai’s academic freedom 
involved his right to disseminate his research and offer 
scholarly advice in settings of his choosing. While 
academic director of the Enbridge Centre, Arvai was 
invited by then-President Obama to serve on the US 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Scientific 
Advisory Board. One would expect the U of C to have 
celebrated this invitation, especially since Arvai worked 
to ensure that the EPA could accommodate his role at
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
the Enbridge Centre. Arvai soon found, however, that 
Enbridge had concerns about a possible conflict of 
interest between Arvai’s role on the EPA advisory board 
and Enbridge’s own corporate values. Indeed, after 
Arvai’s appointment to the EPA, Enbridge took steps to 
influence the parameters of Arvai’s role as director of the 
Enbridge Centre. On November 2, 2011, Dan O’Grady, 
National Manager of Community Partnerships and 
Investment at Enbridge, wrote to Dean Waverman: 
We believe it would be helpful to ensure the agreement clearly 
states that if the Director is unable to fulfill his duties in 
keeping with our agreed upon expectations, that the University 
would begin a search for a suitable replacement. We would 
like your assurance that there are no unexpected or unknown 
affiliations that would prevent Joe from fulfilling his duties as 
Director? (Email of November 15, 2011) 
Faced with these concerns and the request from Enbridge, 
senior U of C officials had a responsibility to make clear 
that the academic director of the ECCS was free to 
determine his own outside academic and advisory 
activities. Yet, they appear instead to have reacted by 
attempting to appease Enbridge at the expense of Dr. 
Arvai’s academic freedom. For example, when Arvai 
realized that the U of C’s announcement of his EPA 
appointment had not been made, he asked the HSB 
Communications department: “who is asking you to hold 
the EPA announcement. And why?” (Email of October25, 
2011). In response, he was informed, “Len [Waverman] 
doesn’t want to piss off Enbridge any more” (Email of 
October 25, 2011). The same individual emailed 
Waverman to confirm that they were working to ensure 
that the news of Arvai’s EPA appointment did not “come 
from Haskayne” because it “could be an affront to 
Enbridge” (Email of October 25, 2011). These email 
exchanges indicate that the HSB leadership and 
communications staff were more concerned with
appeasing a corporate donor than supporting the 
academic freedom of Arvai and, in turn, the academic 
mission of the Enbridge Centre. 
Dr. Arvai’s academic freedom was also at issue in the 
process of naming the ECCS. The inclusion of the term 
“Enbridge” in the name was not a surprise or the main 
problem. Rather, the name as a whole was a relevant 
concern because of what it conveyed about the Centre’s 
academic focus, values, and capacities. For Arvai, the 
Centre’s naming drew on his research expertise and 
knowledge of relevant academic and policy networks. 
Arvai was the Svare Chair in Applied Decision Research 
at the U of C and was known externally as a leader in the 
area of “triple bottom line” decision-making: a form of 
corporate leadership and decision-making that takes into 
account financial, social, and environmental interests. 
The email record shows that the process of naming the 
Centre became a source of concern for Arvai because it 
pitted academic values against corporate sensitivities. 
Weighing in on the issues around potential ECCS 
collaborators and the naming of the Centre in an April 
13, 2011 email to Arvai, copied to the HSB Director of 
Development, Dean Waverman opined that “If CMU is 
the price we pay in the short run – that’s the price – but 
only the SR [short runt?]. The name is for them to 
choose[.]” Eventually, Arvai is told by Waverman to 
“take Dan’s (Dan O’Grady, National Manager of 
Community Partnerships and Investment at Enbridge) 
name!” (Email of May 4, 2011) for the Centre. 
In his interview with the Investigatory Committee, Dr. 
Arvai stated that conceptualizing and planning for the 
ECCS’s role was an academic task but that he was 
prepared to work reasonably with Enbridge on a range 
of issues. In his contribution to the Globe and Mail on 
November 6, 2015, Arvai described his approach to such 
partnerships:
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
… when it comes to corporate donations to universities—like 
the one for the Enbridge Centre—I believe that donors have 
every right to raise certain questions, and to have measured 
expectations. For example, I think donors should be able to 
suggest—but not necessarily select—individuals who could 
effectively serve in an advisory capacity. And, they should be 
granted a meaningful voice in the dialog that results in the 
establishment of a Centre’s name and mission. They should not 
be allowed to require that support from an academic centre be 
available only to individuals who share their ‘core values.’ 
The email record also shows that Dr. Arvai was willing 
to work with Enbridge on naming and other issues. On 
May 18, 2011, Arvai wrote, “It might make sense for me 
to spend some meaningful time at Enbridge… learning 
about the company’s interests; this way I could help 
to guide the strategic direction of the Centre in the 
direction of some of Enbridge’s key areas of 
interest/influence.” In the process of establishing the 
Centre, Arvai sought to be cooperative. He eventually 
accepted the donor’s proposed name and the 
collaboration with CMU. Despite his serious concerns 
about Enbridge’s “evolving” demands, he agreed to 
remain the Centre’s director and work with Enbridge 
on the Centre’s launch event. 
More broadly, Dr. Arvai’s academic freedom to 
determine the research agenda and outcomes at the 
ECCS was clearly affected by the pressure brought to 
bear by senior U of C officials. Arvai expected donor 
pressure to some degree, as he states in his Globe and Mail 
article, but felt that Enbridge was demanding “way way 
too much” for a “tiny amount of money” (Email of 
December 20, 2011). Dean Waverman and Kim Kadatz 
occasionally shared these concerns, as the email record 
indicates, but their support for Arvai’s position was 
inconsistent at best, and Waverman and Kadatz both 
repeatedly chose to side with Enbridge instead of Arvai.
They did so in initial conversations about naming and 
collaborators. They did so in the case of Arvai’s defense 
of the rights of post-doctoral researchers to “go where 
their research interests take them” [both geographically 
and intellectually] (Email, March 8, 2011). They did so 
when Arvai insisted that academics alone should define 
what constitutes a “research output” (Email, June 5, 
2012). In these cases and others, Arvai sought to affirm 
the academic mission of the ECCS against the apparent 
desires of senior administrators to please the sponsor. 
Notably, Dr. Arvai’s concerns were shared by at least one 
academic colleague, Professor Harrie Vredenburg, 
former director of an earlier U of C Centre called IRIS 
(International Resource Industries and Sustainability). 
Vredenburg told Dean Waverman on August 26, 2011, 
that the Enbridge sponsorship was “a classic case of ‘he 
who pays the piper calls the tunes’” and that “Enbridge is 
doing too much tune calling, in my view, to the point 
that the Centre’s usefulness to HSB academics is being 
sacrificed to Enbridge’s PR [public relations] objectives.” 
Vredenburg pointed to the naming issue, noting that it 
“does not reflect the Calgary/ Western Canadian 
economy” and “smacks of us being apologists for the 
fossil fuel industry rather than independent scholars and 
teachers doing work in a broadly defined area.” This 
communication from Vredenburg lends further 
credence to Arvai’s view that Enbridge’s interventions, 
with the support of senior U of C administrators, 
threatened to undermine the Enbridge Centre’s academic 
mission. 
Examples of Supporting Material from the Factual 
Record Regarding Joe Arvai’s Defense of the 
Centre’s Academic Role: 
We cannot maintain our credibility as serious scholars/ 
researchers if the sponsors can dictate the Centre’s agenda… I
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
cannot serve as the Centre’s Academic Director if any of its 
sponsors are allowed to meddle in its academic activities.
— Joe Arvai, HSB faculty member and ECCS Director, to Len
Waverman, HSB Dean, November 2, 2011 
I also heard a comment that Enbridge questioned why we had 
so many (currently 2 out of 5 members) ‘academics’ on the 
Advisory Board. The answer is simple: Because we’re an 
academic centre.
— Email from Joe Arvai to Len Waverman and Kim Kadatz, HSB
Director of Development, December 19, 2011 
This kept me up last night. They are giving us a tiny amount 
of money and are asking for way, way too much. Their 
expectations don't match their donation. We’re currently on 
the road to a disappointing relationship with them. 
— Email from Joe Arvai to Len Waverman, December 20, 2011
I’ve built a solid academic reputation and career on being a 
credible, defensible and impartial policy advisor. Aspects of the 
CMU arrangement, and this centre more generally, could 
paint me and us in a bad light. It seems I am one of only a 
small few who sees it this way…. Kim, I know you’ll tell me ‘it’s 
in the gift agreement’ … But frankly, the arrangement with 
this centre has been evolving since we started and I am, once 
again, growing less and less comfortable….
— Email from Joe Arvai to Kim Kadatz and Dean Waverman of HSB
March 10, 2012
How did Dr. Arvai’s tenure as academic director of the 
ECCS come to an end? No U of C administrator spoke to 
us about this issue and a timeline submitted by the U of 
C to the McMahon review stated that there were “[n]o 
documents” relevant to the “resignation” of Arvai as 
ECCS director.12 In his interview with us, Arvai recalled
12. “Timeline of Primary Events for Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
 Sustainability,” undated.
that then-Dean Waverman phoned him to discuss his 
removal as ECCS director one week after Arvai told 
Enbridge’s public relations firm, National Public 
Relations, of his opposition on scientific grounds to the 
Northern Gateway pipeline. Arvai told us that National 
Public Relations asked him about the pipeline at a 
meeting in advance of the ECCS’s launch and that the 
question arose because, although “canned” media (which 
we understand to mean media not expected to ask 
awkward or probing questions) would attend the launch, 
other media might also attend and ask about the 
Northern Gateway pipeline. Arvai explained further that, 
while he sought to step down previously as academic 
director, he agreed to stay on at Waverman’s request for 
three reasons. First, he was only one and a half years into 
his position at the U of C and needed to make it work 
after having relocated to Calgary. Second, he wanted to 
avoid upsetting Waverman out of concern that his 
position would be reviewed and his career harmed. 
Third, Arvai’s wife was seeking a faculty position after 
obtaining her PhD and Arvai wanted to support her by 
being “a good soldier.” He also gave the example of 
another tenured faculty member, David Layzell, who had 
been dismissed as academic director of a U of C research 
centre and subsequently re-located to a basement office 
in the Biology building after standing up to the 
University Administration on issues of energy and the 
environment. 
We found Arvai’s explanation for his departure as ECCS 
director, following his earlier attempts to resign, to be 
credible and very troubling. Yet, even if we put aside this 
issue completely, we think that Arvai’s academic freedom 
was infringed over the course of his tenure as ECCS 
director. That infringement may not appear extreme or 
acute at first glance. Enbridge did not direct whom to 
hire at the U of C, for instance, or ghost write academic
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
publications. Rather, Enbridge’s priorities were 
translated into pressure on academic decision-making in 
more subtle and incremental ways. Enbridge was able to 
make suggestions about the Centre’s name and the 
Centre’s director was pressed to accept those suggestions 
over his academic judgment. Enbridge was given special 
access to the University’s academic and other staff to 
discuss or determine academic priorities. Enbridge was 
allowed to recommend partners for the Centre, with 
pressure brought to bear on the Centre’s director to 
accept them. Enbridge was given extensive influence 
over the planning and design of the Centre’s public 
launch. In each of these respects, it should have been 
apparent to University officials that Enbridge had a 
related public relations interest in conflict with the 
Centre’s academic mission. Viewed in isolation, some 
of Enbridge’s actions would not rise to the level of an 
encroachment on academic freedom but, as an 
accumulation of interventions, in our view they do. 
Examples of Supporting Material from the Factual 
Record Regarding Enbridge’s Reaction to Joe 
Arvai’s Appointment to an EPA Advisory 
Committee:
I’ve asked them if they would consider combining the EPA 
announcement in there so that it can still be timely yet not 
come from Haskayne… This way, the news is shared in a 
timely fashion… but it’s not associating Haskayne with it 
directly, which could be an affront to Enbridge.
— Email from Kim Lawrence, HSB Director of Communications and
Marketing, to Dean Waverman of HSB and Julie Phillips, cc’d Kim 
 Kadatz, October 25, 2011
The Director will not have any relationships or activities 
which impinge on his or her role as Academic Lead or on his 
or her ability to speak on any issue involving the Center.
— Email from Len Waverman, citing Enbridge’s requests concerning
the Centre’s academic director, to Joe Arvai, November 1, 2011
I’ve been going over the TOR for Enbridge Centre. They don't 
address the Enbridge issues – Director won’t have conflicts… 
Can we redo these together in the am?
— Email from Len Waverman to Kim Kadatz, November 27, 2011
This case of the ECCS is an example of the indirect or 
inconspicuous ways in which private funding can 
compromise academic freedom. It is one thing for a 
private funder to make suggestions, quite another for an 
academic director to be put under pressure by senior 
administrators for raising concerns about them. If Dr. 
Arvai had not stood up to what he thought were 
inappropriate suggestions from Enbridge, it is reasonable 
to assume that he would not have run into difficulties 
with senior University officials and that Enbridge’s 
suggestions may have continued or escalated under his 
directorship. Once it became known that Arvai was no 
longer the Centre’s academic director, it is likewise 
reasonable to infer that a message was received by others 
at the HB, particularly future directors of the Centre, to 
the effect that suggestions from Enbridge were to be 
taken more as directions. Whether the Centre’s 
incoming director took this approach is not the central 
question. The question is whether it would be reasonable 
to expect any new director or Dean to be influenced by 
the circumstances of the previous director’s term at the 
Centre and his eventual departure. We have no doubt 
that it would be. 
The resulting impact of these actions on the reputation 
of the university is that the U of C becomes known as a 
place where the public interest in free and independent 
academic research, teaching, and service can readily be 
undermined by private funders’ priorities. Put differently, 
it becomes known as a place where the apparently 
conflicting loyalties of a university president – who is 
being paid by a private sponsor as well as the university –
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
can directly shape the university’s decision-making. In 
the case of the Enbridge Centre, we know enough from 
the record to say with confidence that these conflicting 
loyalties played out in the U of C administration’s 
relationship with academic staff, specifically Dr. Arvai, 
and contributed to compromises of academic freedom. 
We did not seek to review in detail what transpired at 
the ECCS after Dr. Arvai’s departure as its director.13 Yet 
we were able to make a few observations about the two-
year period after Arvai’s departure using documents that 
were disclosed to us by the U of C in November 2016. 
The observations support our finding that the ECCS’s 
academic mission, as characterized and defended by 
Arvai, was in conflict with the U of C administration’s 
goal to deliver a public relations benefit for Enbridge and 
to cultivate relations with other corporate donors. These 
observations are as follows: 
 In June 2012, shortly after Arvai’s departure, the
ECCS interim director reported to Enbridge that the 
ECCS’s overarching marketing and communications 
goals would be, among other things, “to enhance the 
reputation of the partners – the Haskayne School of 
Business, the University of Calgary, Central Michigan 
University, and Enbridge.” A marketing and 
communications plan for the ECCS, marked “draft,” 
laid out a plan to capture the “reach” of the centre,
13. After Arvai’s departure in March 2012, the ECCS was run by an 
 interim director, Loren Falkenberg, a faculty member and 
 associate dean at the Haskayne Business School. In November 
 2012, a new director, Bob Page, was hired. Page was a non-
 tenured adjunct faculty member at Haskayne who had 
 previously worked for ten years as a vice-president of 
 TransAlta, an electricity power generator formerly known as 
 Calgary Power. We have not sought to investigate the role of 
 these subsequent directors of the ECCS and make no findings 
 or conclusions with respect to them.
including “circulation of a publication, program 
viewers, website analytics, number of hard copy 
pieces distributed, attendance at events, Twitter 
analytics and more.” The ECCS also committed to 
provide monthly updates on its marketing and 
communications activities to the ECCS “project team 
(including Enbridge).” (“Progress report on initiation 
of the Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability,” 
Memo from ECCS interim director Loren Falkenberg 
to Steve Wuori [of Enbridge], June 13, 2012). 
 In the same June 2012 report, the ECCS interim
director reported to Enbridge that the ECCS would 
coordinate with Central Michigan University (CMU) 
to plan public talks in Michigan. A CMU contact had 
been asked by the ECCS’s external advisory board, 
which included an Enbridge official, “to develop a 
presentation on the impact of the pipeline leak, and 
the remediation steps taken by different stakeholders” 
(“Progress report on initiation of the Enbridge Centre 
for Corporate Sustainability”, Memo from ECCS 
interim director Loren Falkenberg to Steve Wuori 
[of Enbridge], June 13, 2012). 
 From the start, the ECCS faced a chronic funding
shortfall because the Enbridge-funded budget was 
inadequate for the Centre’s planned activities. We 
discuss this issue in more detail below. The relevant 
point here is that, faced with this budget crunch, the 
new ECCS director (Bob Page), appointed in 
November 2012, worked actively until late 2013 to 
attract more corporate support. Page focused these 
efforts on companies operating in the oil and gas 
industry, including Cenovus, ConocoPhillips, Ledcor, 
and Suncor (“Dean’s Report to the Academic 
Advisory Group, Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability,” Report by Haskayne Business School 
Dean Jim Dewald, April 21, 2014; “Minutes – 
Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Academic Advisory Meeting,” November 22, 2012; 
and March 5, 2013). 
 Various ECCS activities in 2013, including speaker
series and honorary fellowships, also appeared 
oriented toward organizations in the oil and gas 
industry. The organizations included the Alberta 
Energy Regulator, the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers, the Canadian Energy Pipeline 
Association, the Canadian Oil Sands Innovation 
Alliance, and Suncor (“Minutes – Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability Academic Advisory 
Meeting,” March 5, 2013; May 14, 2013; and October 
7, 2013). 
 The ECCS began its Enbridge Research in Action
Seminar series with a public talk on May 2, 2013, 
delivered by Brenda Kenny, who was president of the 
Canadian Energy Pipeline Association at the time. 
The talk was held at the U of C’s downtown campus 
and drew a crowd of 240. In its report of the talk, the 
U of C’s UToday bulletin posted the headline 
“Haskayne speaker series: Pipeline industry invites 
dialogue, counters false claims” and noted that the 
ECCS was supported by a $2.25 million “gift” from 
Enbridge. The report also mentioned that the next 
talk in the Enbridge Seminar series would be 
delivered by three retired energy chief executives 
from Enbridge, Nexen, and TransAlta, respectively 
(“Haskayne speaker series: Pipeline industry invites 
dialogue, counters false claims”, UToday, May 2, 
2013; “Minutes – Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability Academic Advisory Meeting,” May 14, 
2013). 
These observations about the ECCS after Arvai’s 
departure provide further support for our conclusion 
that the U of C was primarily interested in running the 
ECCS in a way that delivered a public relations benefit
for Enbridge and the oil and gas industry. Within a few 
months of Arvai’s departure, the ECCS was used to give 
an academic platform for public talks in Michigan on the 
remediation of the Enbridge oil spill into the Kalamazoo 
River in 2010. The ECCS committed to Enbridge that it 
would work toward enhancing Enbridge’s reputation 
and report monthly on its marketing efforts. In 2013, the 
ECCS director actively worked to cultivate relationships 
with other companies in the industry, and the ECCS 
launched a speaker series that provided a university-
backed forum for oil and gas industry representatives to 
convey their viewpoint to public audiences. These 
observations support the conclusion that the ECCS’s 
academic mission was compromised by a desire to 
appease Enbridge and the oil and gas industry as a way to 
attract more corporate funding. It was in this context 
that the infringements on academic freedom at the ECCS 
took place.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
6| External Influence, Institutional Autonomy, 
 & Academic Integrity
Partnerships between universities and external actors, 
where they have adequate funding to support an 
academic purpose, can be very positive. Yet senior 
university administrators must ensure that donors do 
not become owners or come to believe they are entitled 
to act as if they are. A public university is not a private 
think tank. Universities must protect their autonomy in 
academic matters, no matter the source of funding that 
supports academic work in teaching and research. In the 
CAUT report, Open For Business On What Terms?, the 
ECCS is discussed as one of several case studies of 
research collaborations (40-43) and assessed in detail 
later in the document (119-25). The report reviews the 
texts of the Enbridge-U of C Donor Agreement and the 
Terms of Reference for the Enbridge Centre, accessed 
through a CAUT FOIP request. In its discussion, the 
report notes the absence of conflict of interest language 
in the Donor Agreement and contradictions between the 
role given to Enbridge in the Donor Agreement on the 
one hand and, on the other, the affirmations of academic 
freedom and institutional autonomy in the Centre’s 
Terms of Reference. 
As it turns out, the “contradictory aspect to this 
collaboration” (Open For Business 42) was evident in the 
ECCS negotiations from the beginning. As a powerful 
company, Enbridge would not donate to a university 
without some view to the upside for its own business 
and reputation. It is clear that Enbridge had a view of 
what it wanted from the ECCS, demonstrated by their 
insistence about naming and collaborators, their 
concerns about Dr. Arvai’s EPA appointment, and their 
efforts to control communications about the ECCS and 
the ECCS launch event. As the email record indicates, 
Enbridge had a strong sense of their rights and status as 
a donor.
Our primary concern is with how Enbridge’s position as 
donor played out in the HSB and U of C senior 
administration. We highlight two examples, both 
involving former Enbridge Vice-President Bonnie 
DuPont, who was at the time Vice-Chair and later Chair 
of the U of C Board of Governors, and who was 
described by the HSB Director of Development as “our 
volunteer” who was “critical in obtaining this 
commitment from Enbridge” (Email of July 22, 2011). 
When differences of view emerged at the ECCS and 
Enbridge about Dr. Arvai’s EPA appointment, Dean 
Waverman broached the question of a new executive 
director with Ms. DuPont in an email of October 20, 
2011. The subject of the email was “Troubles at 
Enbridge”: 
Bonnie, met with Glen and Steve yesterday—explained 
situation—Joe Arvai is running the Center—he has an internal 
Board and an external one—speakers ready to go—the ad for 
Associate Director is posted tomorrow. They are upset, pulled 
the big announcement with Pat and Elizabeth for the 10 Nov! I 
am concerned that the $ are at risk! 
They want a spokesperson, What about Bonnie DuPont 
Adjunct Prof and Director, Joe is Academic Advisor, David 
Lertzman is Outreach Advisor. We will have a strong 
Associate Director—no work for you + gives you platform to 
raise $$$$. 
DuPont replied: 
Oh Dear… not good. Len, I would take this on as you describe 
if I was not on the Board of Governors… but I still have a year 
plus a few months left in my term so I simply cannot do it… 
who do they want in the role? 
In the context of the Enbridge-U of C agreement, 
Waverman and DuPont were both concerned about the 
donor having become “upset” about Dr. Arvai, and
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Waverman acted promptly to reassure Enbridge in the 
hopes of maintaining Enbridge’s monetary commitment. 
In doing so, Waverman did not meet his responsibility 
to support Arvai in his academic role, preferring instead 
to try to recruit DuPont in the role of a “spokesperson” 
for Enbridge and to give her a “no work” platform to 
raise money. In doing so, Waverman sought to replace 
an academic with clearly relevant expertise, who had 
insisted on protecting the Centre’s academic mission as 
he saw it, with a former Enbridge Vice-President who 
would appease Enbridge. 
As it happened, DuPont, not Waverman, raised the 
concern about her dual role as a member of the U of C 
Board of Governors and then asked, “Who do they 
want?” In the context of the exchange, we read the “they” 
in this question as a reference to Waverman’s “Glen and 
Steve” at Enbridge. This interpretation is supported by a 
subsequent email of October 20, 2011, in which 
Waverman informed Glenn Herchak (Enbridge’s 
Director of Communications) and Steve Wuori 
(Enbridge’s Executive Vice-President, Liquids and 
Pipelines) that “Bonnie DuPont would be delighted to be 
Director when she comes off U of C Board in 14 months.” 
We see this part of the record as providing further 
evidence that Waverman and DuPont were willing to 
appease Enbridge, even to the point of displacing Arvai 
in his role as academic director. 
As the email record shows, Enbridge also exerted 
significant influence over the timing and nature of the 
planned “soft” and “hard” launches of the ECCS. About 
$14,000 was allocated for the event itself. In the planning 
process, U of C promotional and communications staff 
were progressively pushed to the side to make way for 
Enbridge officials and their team at National Public 
Relations (NPR), a public relations firm hired by 
Enbridge to manage the ECCS launch. NPR staff worked
to direct the promotion and launch, including choosing 
the host and location, vetting speakers and the content of 
their presentations, and insisting that Enbridge sign off 
on the questions asked to participants in a promotional 
video about the ECCS. This level of involvement by a 
private donor in the public launch of a university 
research centre is unusual. 
Plans evolved and the early target date for the launch, 
which coincided with the anniversary of the Kalamazoo 
River oil spill, came and went in 2011. It then emerged 
that President Cannon might not be able to represent the 
U of C at the launch, in which case Cannon indicated 
that, if she could not attend, Bonnie DuPont should 
replace her. This was a noteworthy choice, considering 
that Ms. DuPont was a U of C Board member and not a 
member of the University’s academic staff. Why not 
choose the U of C Vice-President of Research, for 
example, when the ECCS was a research initiative and he 
a distinguished scientist and an authentic academic 
representative? We do not know the answer to this 
question, having been unable to put it to Cannon directly, 
but we see it as an indication that Cannon was more 
concerned about giving a favourable platform for 
Enbridge-associated business voices than affirming the 
Centre’s academic credibility.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
7| Inadequate Funding and the 
 Pressure to Raise More Corporate Money
The level of funding provided by the Enbridge 
sponsorship – $225,000 annually over ten years – was 
woefully inadequate for the ECCS’s envisioned activities. 
This finding is supported by our review of documents 
produced to us by the U of C in November 2016, which 
reveal the ECCS’s financial difficulties after its public 
launch in March 2012. From then until at least early 
2014, the ECCS suffered a chronic funding shortfall. 
The ECCS’s planned activities were based on an annual 
budget of $500,000. This amount was more than double 
the average annual amount committed by Enbridge 
under the sponsorship. Even the $500,000 budget did 
not cover the cost of a salary for a full director of the 
ECCS, implying that time committed by Arvai or other 
full-time academic directors would, at least in part, be 
voluntary or depend on other University resources 
(“Dean’s Report to the Academic Advisory Group, 
Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability,” Report by 
Haskayne Business School Dean Jim Dewald, April 21, 
2014). 
To illustrate, the new ECCS director, Bob Page,14
reported in or around late 2013 (about one year into his 
term) that the ECCS’s budget issues had been “a serious 
concern” since before he became director “because the 
cash flow… from Enbridge was less than half of the cost 
of the basic work plan.” Page said the ECCS was “living 
on borrowed time” and could only fund its activities 
because various planned activities had not yet taken place. 
To remedy the situation, he sought to create a “named 
opportunity” for another donor to cover all or part of the 
cost of the ECCS director’s salary. Page also proposed
14. Although the author’s name for the relevant document is 
 redacted, it appears to have been Bob Page, who was 
 appointed as the new ECCS director in November 2012.
that part of the ECCS’s administrative costs, “such as 10% 
of salary, benefits, and office expenses” be charged to 
other funds at Haskayne (“Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability,” Report on Budget and 
Financial Management by [unnamed] Director, undated). 
From the start, then, the ECCS was hobbled by a built-in 
funding gap. In other words, the U of C committed to 
Enbridge that the ECCS would carry out a range of 
activities with less than half of the ECCS’s cost funded by 
the Enbridge sponsorship. The shortfall was to be made 
up by more corporate fundraising (“Minutes – Enbridge 
Centre for Corporate Sustainability Academic Advisory 
Meeting,” November 22, 2012). To raise the money, 
Page reported in 2013 that he would target various 
companies including Cenovus, ConocoPhillips, Ledcor, 
and Suncor, all of which, we note, have operations in the 
oil and gas industry (“Minutes – Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability Academic Advisory Meeting,” 
March 15, 2012). By late 2013, Page reported that these 
fundraising efforts had been unsuccessful, complaining 
that, while he had “many friends who are executives in 
Calgary energy firms, none of these firms are on the 
approved list for us to approach” (“Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability,” Report on Budget and 
Financial Management by [unnamed] Director, undated). 
The funding shortfall eventually led to requests that 
Enbridge revisit the ECCS’s design, including its name. 
In April 2014, the ECCS director (apparently someone 
other than Bob Page at that point) reported that 
Enbridge was considering “special project payments” to 
cover costs for events, such as a planned sustainability 
summit that had been postponed due to budget 
constraints. Enbridge was also willing to consider 
changing the Centre’s name by replacing the word 
“Enbridge” with “Canadian” in order to facilitate 
fundraising (“Minutes – Enbridge Centre for Corporate
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Sustainability Academic Advisory Meeting,” April 28, 
2014). Today, the Centre is called the Haskayne Centre 
for Corporate Sustainability, though Enbridge’s name 
remains attached to student scholarships and a speakers 
series (website of the Haskayne Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability, visited May 26, 2017). 
In April 2014, Haskayne Dean Jim Dewald reported 
on the ECCS’s fundraising failures. Dewald had been 
appointed a year earlier to replace Len Waverman, 
who had left the U of C. Dewald stated that the ECCS’s 
activities had to be adjusted to fit the Enbridge-funded 
budget of $225,000 instead of the “fully funded” budget 
of $500,000. At the time, ECCS salaries and benefits 
costs alone were more than the entire Enbridge-funded 
budget. Dewald reported that the ECCS would have to 
“engage leverage” by pursuing activity-specific 
sponsorship to meet the ECCS’s original objectives, 
including the costs of Enbridge student awards, the 
Enbridge speaker series, outreach, and materials and 
supplies. Dewald also proposed to cut the Centre’s 
academic staff; the ECCS’s full-time director would be 
replaced by an associate director, who would receive 
guidance from a faculty member serving as the ECCS 
academic director for an annual stipend of $15,000 
(“Dean’s Report to the Academic Advisory Group, 
Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability,” Report 
by Haskayne Business School Dean Jim Dewald, 
April 21, 2014). 
This financial situation indicates that, from a business 
point of view, the Enbridge sponsorship was always 
skewed in Enbridge’s favour. The university made 
unfunded promises to Enbridge at the university’s risk 
and expense. On this basis, we think the U of C did a 
poor job from the outset in pursuing and negotiating the 
sponsorship. The ECCS simply did not have enough 
money from Enbridge to meet its commitments as
understood by U of C administrators. And yet, U of C 
senior officials subsequently treated these commitments 
as obligations that had to be met in order to protect the 
university’s reputation in the eyes of its sponsor. As 
former Justice McMahon put it, in the context of 
clearing President Cannon of wrongdoing, Cannon’s 
responsibility was “to protect the [U of C’s] reputation… 
as an institution that honours its commitments to 
donors” (see Appendix A; Report of the Honourable 
Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C., Barrister and Solicitor, to 
the Board of Governors of the University of Calgary, 14 
December 2015, p 9). In the case of the ECCS, the 
problem was that those at the U of C who assumed these 
commitments to Enbridge over-promised in their ability 
to meet the commitments from the outset. When the 
constraints became untenable, it was the Centre’s 
directors who were held accountable, instead of the 
administrators who negotiated the sponsorship 
agreement, the Board members who were party to its 
skewed terms, and the senior U of C leadership who 
failed to exercise proper oversight. 
In these circumstances, U of C administrators came 
under pressure to raise more money for the ECCS, and 
they looked to the oil and gas industry to do so. As we 
discuss below, Len Waverman came under pressure in 
August 2012 when the U of C Provost, Dru Marshall, 
instructed him that “[d]ollars from donors such as 
Enbridge create tremendous leveraging opportunities,” 
asked him to explain “[w]hat dollars have been leveraged 
from other sources,” and warned him that they were at a 
critical point for the ECCS “that could result in 
reputational damage.” President Cannon followed up to 
tell Waverman that Enbridge was “not very happy,” that 
they were “looking for success and not seeing it” from 
him, and that it was “not good for [Waverman] or the 
university.” These messages from the Provost and the 
President show how the ECCS’s underfunding created a
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
type of funding trap whereby the university had to find 
more money just to deliver what it had already promised 
to Enbridge. The fundraising push that followed at the 
ECCS, under Bob Page, targeted corporations in the oil 
and gas industry and coincided with other ECCS 
activities which provided a university-backed forum for 
oil and gas industry representatives to present their 
views to public audiences. Even before the President’s 
intervention with Waverman in August 2012, the ECCS 
had committed to regular reports to Enbridge on its 
marketing activities, assuring them that part of the 
Centre’s mission was to enhance Enbridge’s reputation. 
In this context, U of C administrators put their 
commitments to a corporate donor ahead of the 
university’s academic credibility. They leveraged 
university resources to support Enbridge’s reputation. 
They assumed the risk that, as a result of the ECCS, the 
U of C would likely be seen as an institution that 
willingly tailors its academic activities to the priorities of 
oil and gas companies. 
Thus, the Enbridge sponsorship reveals how a university 
can enter into a cycle of dependency on corporate donors. 
To carry out its plan for meeting its commitments to 
Enbridge, the U of C had to raise more money than it got 
from Enbridge in the first place. The dependency led to 
inherent pressures to compromise academic integrity 
and objectivity in order to appease a funder. Whether 
intentionally or not, the ECCS’s design subordinated the 
university’s responsibilities as an academic institution to 
the preferences of corporate donors. The story of the 
ECCS is a cautionary tale about how easily a university 
can set itself up for industry capture.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
8| Governance, Institutional Culture, 
 & Academic Leadership
The culture of a university campus may describe its 
teaching or research intensiveness, student activities, or 
other, less tangible elements that contribute to a sense of 
shared purpose. Alberta’s Post-Secondary Learning Act 
stipulates that the core mission of a university is to 
ensure that “Albertans have the opportunity to enhance 
their social, cultural and economic well-being through 
participation in an accessible, responsive and flexible 
post-secondary system.” With this in mind, a campus 
culture, in our view, should be supported by governance 
mechanisms that include faculty, students, and staff as 
well as senior university officials. In the case of the U of 
C, the Board of Governors, Senate, and General Faculties 
Council are the primary venues for members of the 
campus community to evaluate the direction of the 
institution and guide how collective practices and goals 
are achieved across the community. In addition, senior 
university leaders should engage in transparent and 
accountable administrative decision-making that 
supports shared governance. 
From the email record and our interviews, there appears 
to have been a significant failure of collegial governance, 
accountability and oversight in the establishment of the 
ECCS. The email record indicates that HSB’s 
Development Officer Kim Kadatz was the central point 
person in the negotiation of the sponsorship agreement 
with Enbridge. The HSB Dean, Len Waverman made 
his preferences known but, in general, Kadatz was the 
primary liaison. In early stages of the sponsorship, this 
role was to be expected of Kadatz in her role as HSB 
Development Officer. Yet Kadatz played a central role in 
the ECCS well past the stage of Enbridge’s initial 
sponsorship. She was involved in discussions about the 
Centre’s naming, terms of reference, partner institutions, 
academic parameters, and public launch. Further, the 
email record indicates that Enbridge continued to rely
heavily on Kadatz long after the sponsorship agreement 
was signed. Indeed, Enbridge appears to have preferred 
to deal with her and was eventually instructed to deal 
directly with the Centre’s director, Dr. Arvai. In these 
respects, it is troubling that Kadatz does not appear to 
have reported or been accountable to anyone besides 
HSB Dean Len Waverman in her activities. Too much 
power over academic affairs was thus concentrated in 
the hands of a non-academic staff person, whose job was 
to cultivate positive relations with outside donors. 
As far as we can tell, the Enbridge sponsorship was never 
vetted at all beyond the HSB Development Office. The 
Enbridge sponsorship does not appear to have come 
before the U of C Board of Governors for approval. 
More problematic still is the lack of notice and discussion 
of the Enbridge sponsorship in the U of C General 
Faculties Council (i.e. Senate). These oversights 
indicate that the processes of review and accountability 
for the ECCS were deeply inadequate. Indeed, we think 
they reveal a serious breakdown of collegial governance 
in relation to this example of corporate sponsorship at 
the U of C. 
At the ECCS’s launch in March 2012, the materials 
prepared for President Cannon – who spoke at the 
launch – called Enbridge’s sponsorship “non-conditional” 
and a “gift.” Both terms suggest a philanthropic gift with 
no strings attached. That situation is far removed from 
the Enbridge sponsorship, which involved prolonged 
negotiations between Enbridge and the U of C about the 
name, mandate, and operating values of the Centre. 
Numerous proposals and counter-proposals made by 
Enbridge in the negotiation of the sponsorship 
agreement and in the establishment and launch of the 
Centre show that the sponsorship was unquestionably 
and troublingly conditional.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
It is unclear to us, and we could not ask her directly, 
whether President Cannon – based on her prepared 
notes – actually described Enbridge’s sponsorship as non-
conditional and a “gift” at the Centre’s launch. If she did, 
then her role at the launch, which she called the 
touchstone for her involvement with the Centre, began 
with a publicly misleading description of Enbridge’s 
relationship with the U of C. Cannon stated to the 
McMahon review that her speaking notes and other 
background materials for the Centre’s launch were 
prepared by her office, with input from the U of C’s 
Development Office, and that she likely read the remarks 
the night before or on the day of the launch. Those 
circumstances do not excuse her from responsibility for 
any misleading claim that the Enbridge sponsorship was 
non-conditional. As president, Cannon must take 
responsibility for her official statements and ensure their 
accuracy, especially on such a key concern as the 
attachment of conditions to a corporate donation. She 
should acknowledge this point, clarify whether she or 
any other university official described Enbridge’s 
sponsorship as non-conditional, and, if so, correct the 
public record. 
There appear to have been serious inadequacies of 
leadership when it comes to maintaining collegiality, 
academic integrity and trust within the University 
community. In the present case, Dr. Arvai consistently 
attempted to draw attention to what he perceived as 
overreaches by Enbridge and conflicted priorities in 
relation to ECCS. Almost every time he did so in the 
email record, Len Waverman and Kim Kadatz 
responded with justifications for Enbridge’s position and 
messages that he should accept what was on offer. On 
the timing of the ECCS launch, for example, Kadatz 
wrote on May 3, 2011 that “they (Enbridge) don’t like to 
be pushed and we will need to take direction from them 
on timing.” In relation to Arvai’s objections to
mentioning CMU at the launch, Kadatz stated 
unabashedly that, “The fact that Enbridge had a spill in 
Michigan and now wants to use this investment as a way 
to make amends and possibly receive some positive PR is 
acceptable” (Email of March 17, 2012). When Arvai 
expressed doubts about his continued role and attempted 
to step down as ECCS academic director, Waverman 
replied: “You can’t just walk away as Enbridge has been 
told you are Director + you negotiated the name” (Email 
of September 10, 2011). When it became apparent that 
Enbridge was uncomfortable with Arvai’s EPA 
appointment and Arvai continued to express doubts 
about his role as academic director, Waverman told him, 
“we have a concern that Enbridge are going to pull the 
grant… I really need you to reconsider this because if it 
goes belly up my ass is on the line and I won’t feel happy 
with you either” (Voicemail October 20, 2011). Arvai 
relented and continued as academic director through the 
fall and winter of 2011-2012. 
After compromising on the Centre’s name, CMU’s 
involvement, control of the ECCS launch and promotion, 
and other issues, Arvai refused to add another Enbridge 
representative to the ECCS external advisory board, as 
he felt doing so would contravene the sponsorship 
agreement. In response, Waverman wrote to Kim 
Kadatz, calling Arvai an “amazing ego and royal pain” 
(Email of March 7, 2012). After Arvai wrote again to 
Waverman on March 8, 2012, about his wish to step 
down, Waverman replied: “Joseph – if you pull out now 
– weeks before the public launch – my head is taken off 
my shoulders – the Centre is likely closed.” Once again 
Arvai relented, only to depart as academic director 
eleven days later. On March 19, 2012, Waverman wrote 
to Enbridge and told them, “Joe Arvai is no longer 
Director of the Centre, there are too many conflicts and 
demands!”
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Examples of Supporting Material from the 
Factual Record Regarding Arvai’s Departure as 
the Centre’s Academic Director:
I’ve made my limits clear from the beginning. I’m living up to 
the letter of the law in the sponsorship agreement with 
respect to CMU. But no further… Also, know that this is non-
negotiable for me…
— Email from Joe Arvai, ECCS Director, to Len Waverman, to 
 HSB Dean, March 7, 2012
Amazing ego and royal pain.
— Email referring to Joe Arvai from Len Waverman, HSB Dean, to
Kim Kadatz, HSB Director of Development, March 7, 2012
Joe Arvai is no longer Director of the Centre, there are too 
many conflicts and demands! Loren [Falkenberg, Associate 
Dean of Research at HSB] and I will represent the Centre at 
the launch and we will move ahead on all the exciting 
outreach and research…
— Email from Len Waverman to Enbridge officials, March 19, 2012
Examples of Supporting Material from the 
Factual Record Regarding the Partnership with 
Central Michigan University:
Each time that we raise concerns about CMU with Enbridge, 
it raises for them a concern that we are not committed to our 
partnership with Enbridge. We are not in a position where 
we can tell Pat Daniel [CEO of Enbridge] what he can or 
cannot say about CMU… The fact that Enbridge had a spill in 
Michigan and now wants to use this investment as a way to 
make amends and possibly receive some positive PR is 
acceptable.
— Email from Kim Kadatz to Len Waverman, March 17, 2012
It must be acknowledged that Len Waverman was 
himself subject to problematic treatment by U of C 
Provost Dru Marshall and President Cannon in emails 
after Arvai’s departure. Several months later, after an 
interim academic director was installed to replace Arvai, 
President Cannon intervened to express concern about 
finding a new ECCS director. On August 21, 2012, she 
wrote to Waverman: “The recruitment of a Director 
needs to be a very high priority and you need to lead this. 
Please send Dru and myself the detailed information for 
this… so we know where this is and how it will be 
managed and concluded successfully.” Provost Marshall 
also communicated to Waverman that, “Dollars from 
donors such as Enbridge create tremendous leveraging 
opportunities. What dollars have been leveraged from 
other sources to make this work? We are at a critical 
point here – one that could result in reputational damage 
if we do not manage the situation” (Email of August 23, 
2012). Waverman responded to Cannon by blaming Joe 
Arvai, who he described as having “pi[ss]ed off Enbridge 
big time” (Email of August 23, 2012). In response, 
Cannon had strong words for Waverman (Email of 
August 23, 2012): 
Enbridge is not very happy… They are looking for success and 
not seeing it. I will be frank and add that they are not seeing 
your leadership on this file and are feeling that once the 
funding was committed, the interest from you was lost. This is 
not good for you or the university. 
In this way, Waverman was put in a difficult position. 
He was informed by the U of C President, herself an 
Enbridge board member, that Enbridge was not happy 
with his performance and that this result was 
presumably not good for his career. Clearly, Waverman 
was being held accountable to the President, without any 
corresponding acknowledgement of the President’s 
evident conflict of interest or the need for her to avoid
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary 
October 2017
involvement with any Enbridge-related matters at the 
University. Under these circumstances, it is fair to expect 
that Waverman felt pressured to sacrifice the academic 
mission of the ECCS where it conflicted with demands 
from Enbridge. Indeed, in response to Cannon, 
Waverman himself raised concerns about Enbridge’s 
interventions in the ECCS. He told Cannon: “Enbridge 
has been difficult – especially their PR firm who were 
trying to use events to buttress Enbridge’s name with 
little insight into the academic needs to be distant and to 
run the Centre as we see fit…” (Email of August 23, 
2012). 
Examples of Supporting Material from the Factual 
Record Regarding President Cannon’s 
Involvement in the ECCS While Being 
Remunerated for Sitting on a Board at Enbridge:
Enbridge is not very happy…. We need content and strategic 
leadership and that is what Enbridge is looking for…. They are 
looking for success and they are not seeing it. I will be frank 
and add that they are not seeing your leadership on this file 
and are feeling that once the funding was committed, the 
interest from you was lost. This is not good for you or the 
university. I want to have a good relationship with Enbridge 
given that Al Monaco is incoming CEO and our grad (and I 
am on one of their Boards!). Our interest is well beyond HSB.
— Email from Elizabeth Cannon to Len Waverman, August 23,
2012, with the mention of her Enbridge board membership
apparently redacted in what was made available in FOIP
disclosures to the CBC
It has been a set of unseen circumstances, but that is not an 
excuse, it is a reason for a leader to step up and take charge, I 
will, late but I will.
— Email from Len Waverman to Elizabeth Cannon, August 23, 2012
On the record before us, senior U of C officials were 
more concerned about procuring corporate donors and 
“leveraging opportunities” than defending and modeling 
academic integrity and administrative transparency. At 
times, they used threats or intimidation in an effort to 
keep Enbridge happy. The conflict intensified to the 
point where it became intolerable for distinguished 
scholars like Dr. Keith and Dr. Arvai, and damaging to 
the University’s academic reputation. 
We have a distinct impression – based on the email 
record, multiple interviews, and media coverage – that 
there is a culture of silencing, and at worst intimidation 
or reprisals, at the U of C. In our interviews with them, 
both Dr. Keith and Dr. Arvai attested to this. Keith felt 
that he and another colleague from the Institute for 
Sustainable Energy, Environment, and Economy were 
forced out. He also had deep concerns about the U of C’s 
capacity to govern itself in relation to corporate 
donations, expressing disappointment at a “culture of 
circumspection and not rocking the boat.” In a CBC 
radio interview on November 2, 2015, Keith stated: 
The issue is that a public institution whose job it is to balance 
competing interests and do high quality research in the public 
interest abjectly failed to do that… The university failed in its 
mission to correctly balance interests, to take money from 
donors and use that money independently. I was appalled and 
many of my colleagues inside the U of C were similarly 
appalled but for various reasons felt they couldn't speak out… 
This is an institution that seems to have had some pretty 
serious management failures and there was no investigation to 
understand what the problems were and fix them. 
Dr. Arvai concurred with this view in our interview 
with him, noting serious failures in management and 
leadership and a “culture of reprisal” in the senior U of C 
administration.
34
CAUT Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Media reports have also provided evidence of a 
University culture of silencing and intimidation, 
particularly in relation to the interests of the oil and gas 
industry. A recent article in the National Observer, for 
example, quoted Urban Studies Department 
Coordinator Byron Miller as stating that the U of C’s 
industry ties produce an “unspoken, but nonetheless 
understood sense that we have to be careful about what 
we [professors] say and do.” The article also cites 
Geography professor Gwendolyn Blue, who states that 
the U of C atmosphere “prevents a critical commentary, 
particularly around corporate influence.” The article 
quotes another faculty member as feeling “downright 
scared” after publicly criticizing U of C’s strategic plan. 
When Political Science professor Barry Cooper 
described U of C’s management culture as “deeply flawed” 
in the press, he noted that, while he had not experienced 
reprisals, his junior colleagues were very concerned 
about speaking out publicly. The National Observer article 
reaffirmed these views about U of C administration’s 
“culture of secrecy” by revealing that President Cannon 
“personally approved more than $90,000 in legal fees to 
fight an information request from the public broadcaster.” 
The story in question “detailed a 2012 information 
request that outlined the relationship between the U of C 
and the fundraising arm of the Conservative party” 
(Adams, The National Observer, August 10, 2016). 
Our Committee observed firsthand this culture of 
silencing and intimidation. Shortly before our site visit to 
U of C on March 16, 2016, Provost Dru Marshall 
emailed all U of C faculty members (Appendix E), 
questioning our authority to conduct an investigation 
and erroneously suggesting that we would not protect 
the confidentiality of interviewees. We responded to 
these claims in writing at the time (Appendix F). We 
believed then and continue to believe that Marshall’s 
email is fairly construed as an implied warning to U of C
faculty members not to speak with us. In this sense, it 
was an unfortunate intervention that risked interfering 
with a transparent and independent review of what 
happened at the Enbridge Centre.15 We also believe that 
Marshall’s reaction was disrespectful of the longstanding 
role of the CAUT in Canadian academic life and CAUT’s 
legitimate concern, on behalf of its members, for the 
academic health of the U of C and other Canadian 
universities. 
Taken together, all of these examples point to significant 
failures in collegial governance, management structures 
and senior leaderships at the U of C, which appear to 
have contributed to a culture of silencing and reprisal. 
The situation at the U of C is perhaps best illustrated by 
the comments of a former director of another short-
lived centre at the U of C, the Institute for Sustainable 
Energy, Environment and Economy. Distinguished 
scientist David Layzell FRSC, communicating to the 
National Observer about the ECCS, said “I really don’t feel 
that I can talk with you about this,” and added, “Maybe 
that says more than us actually talking.”
15. U of C faculty members were subsequently quoted as 
 describing Provost Marshall’s actions as “threatening” (Metro 
 News, April 13, 2016).
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
9| Recommendations
a) The governance structure and processes of the 
University of Calgary Board of Governors should be 
reviewed. The review should examine the composition 
of the Board of Governors, how Board appointments are 
made, how diversity on the Board is understood and 
achieved, how transparency in the Board’s decisions can 
be improved, and how the Board’s decisions can be 
linked more consistently to the principles and practices 
of academic freedom, collegial consultation, and collegial 
governance. 
b) As part of its conflict of interest policies, the 
University of Calgary should prohibit its president and 
other senior officials from serving for remuneration on 
any external corporate board. Service on external boards 
should be limited to non-profit, civic, governmental, and 
academic organizations and should not be remunerated 
beyond covering expenses incurred in activities related 
to such service. CAUT should urge this practice be 
followed at all post-secondary institutions in Canada. 
c) President Cannon and the Board of Governors should 
acknowledge publicly that it was wrong for her, as U of 
C president, not to have recused herself from Enbridge-
related matters at the U of C when she was in a clear 
conflict of interest due to her role as a well paid Enbridge 
board member. 
d) President Cannon should confirm whether she or any 
other university official publicly misrepresented 
Enbridge’s sponsorship as “non-conditional” and a “gift” 
and, if so, ensure that the public record is corrected. She 
should also acknowledge that her conduct in relation to 
the Enbridge Centre, and the conduct of senior U of C 
officials under her direction, damaged the University of 
Calgary’s academic reputation. She should apologize for 
the resulting distress caused to Dr. Arvai and his family.
e) The University of Calgary should review its 
relationships with external entities and provide a public 
report on whether and how those partnerships comply 
with the principles laid out in the CAUT’s report entitled 
Open For Business: On What Terms? 
f) The University of Calgary should implement a policy 
governing the creation of externally-sponsored research 
institutes on campus. The policy should explicitly 
mandate that any such institutes be bound by and respect 
academic freedom as a primary value. 
g) Agreements based on external sponsorships, gifts, or 
partnerships at the U of C and other universities should 
be assessed rigorously, and independently of those who 
negotiate them, prior to being accepted by the University. 
The assessment should ensure that the university’s 
commitments to a sponsor, donor, or partner do not put 
the university in a situation of further financial 
dependency on outside corporate interests in order to 
avoid pressures for administrators and faculty to 
compromise on the principles laid out in the CAUT’s 
Open for Business: On What Terms? report. 
h) Processes of collegial governance and shared 
decision-making involving U of C senior leadership and 
U of C faculty, staff and students should be reviewed and 
strengthened, as should the overall accountability of the 
U of C senior leadership. This review should also focus 
on bolstering the role of collegial governance bodies in 
overseeing and vetting corporate sponsorships and 
donations to the U of C. 
i) The University of Calgary should release in full and 
unredacted – to Joe Arvai, Leonard Waverman, and any 
individual or organization that was subject to negative 
findings or conclusions in the McMahon report and is
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
identifiable based on the contents of that report – all 
documents provided to former Justice McMahon for the 
purposes of his review. Barring personal privacy 
concerns, the University should also make public all such 
documents.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
10| Select References
Adams, Christopher. “Teachers investigate whether 
University of Calgary is in bed with Big Oil,” National 
Observer, 10 August 2016, Web. 
Arvai, Joe. “Enbridge, the university of Calgary, and me,” 
Globe and Mail, 6 November 2015, Web. 
Bakx, Kyle. “U of C staff suspected Michigan partnership 
with Central Michigan University might be viewed as 
‘payoff’,’” CBC News, 1 November 2015, Web. 
CAUT/ACPPU. Policy Statement on Academic Freedom, 
CAUT/ACCPU, November 2011, Web. 
CAUT/ACPPU. “Open Letter to the Association of 
Universities and Colleges of Canada,” CAUT/ACCPU, 4 
November 2011, Web. 
CAUT/ACPPU. Open For Business On What Terms? An 
Analysis of 12 Collaborations between Canadian Universities 
and Corporations, Donors and Governments. Ottawa: 
Canadian Association of University Teachers, 2013. 
Cooper, Barry. “U of C administration is consumed with 
damage control,” Calgary Herald, 13 November 2015, 
Web. 
Findlay, Len M. and Paul M. Bidwell, Pursuing Academic 
Freedom: ‘Free and Fearless’?” Saskatoon: Purich Publishing, 
2001.
Interviews in Calgary, 18-19 April 2016. 
Interview by teleconference with David Keith, 30 May 
2016. 
Interview by teleconference with Joe Arvai, 6 July 2016. 
Nikiforuk, Andrew. “Crash of ‘The Mechanic’: Oil Sands 
Flogger Bruce Carson Found Guilty,” The Tyee, 21 
September 2016, Web. 
Rusnell, Charles. “University of Calgary spent $90,000 
on legal fees related to CBC request for information,” 
CBC News, 28 May 2016, Web. 
Universities Canada (AUCC). Statement on Academic 
Freedom. Universities Canada, 25 October 2011, Web. 
Weston, Greg. “Ex-PMO aide left Calgary School with 
debt,” CBC News, 11 October 2011, Web.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
October 2017
Appendices
Appendix A 
Assessment of the Report by The Honourable Terrence 
F. McMahon, Q.C, Barrister and Solicitor, to the Board 
of Governors of the University of Calgary 
Appendix B 
Summary of Emails: Significant Actors and Timeline of 
Events 
Appendix C 
CAUT Policy Statement on Academic Freedom 
Appendix D 
CAUT Open Letter on the AUCC Statement on 
Academic Freedom 
Appendix E 
Message of March 18, 2016, from U of C Provost Dru 
Marshall to U of C Staff 
Appendix F 
Response of the Investigatory Committee to the Message 
of March 18, 2016, from Provost Dru Marshall to U of C 
Staff 
Appendix G 
Correspondence between U of C Board Chair Gordon M. 
Ritchie and the Investigatory Committee 
Appendix H 
CAUT Guiding Principles for University Collaborations
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
Appendix A
Assessment of the Report by The Honourable Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C, Barrister and 
Solicitor, to the Board of Governors of the University of Calgary 
After media reports and the ensuing public debate about the Enbridge Centre, the University of 
Calgary’s Board of Governors announced, on November 6, 2015, a review of the Centre “from its 
creation to current operations.”1 In this appendix, we offer comments and assessments about the 
resulting McMahon review. 
I. Background to the McMahon review 
The Board of Governors described its review as independent, noting that the review would be 
conducted by an external third-party reviewer.2 For this role, a committee of the University’s Board 
appointed Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C., a private lawyer and arbitrator and former judge of the 
Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench. The committee also hired another external private lawyer, Phyllis 
Smith, to serve as counsel to the Board and to advise on the process of the review including its 
terms of reference. 
The Board announced the appointment of former Justice McMahon on November 19, 2015. He 
completed his report less than a month later on December 14, 2015, having interviewed twelve 
persons who are listed in an appendix to his report. McMahon also reviewed “binders of documents 
released pursuant to a FOIP [Freedom of Information and Privacy] request” as well as “[a]dditional 
documents… provided by some of the persons interviewed.”3 Based on his review, former Justice 
McMahon concluded, in summary, that the University and its employees had not engaged in any 
misconduct in relation to the Centre, that the Centre did not compromise the academic freedom of 
the University or its staff, that there had been no breach of the then applicable University Policies 
or Procedures but for what McMahon characterized as a minor issue involving Board of Governors’ 
approval of donations that carry naming rights, and that there had been various changes to 
University Policies and Procedures related to the subject matter of his review. 
II. A summary of our comments and assessments of the McMahon review 
While we think it a positive step for the University to have recognized that an independent and 
transparent review of the Enbridge Centre was needed, we are critical of the McMahon review for 
four reasons:
1 University of Calgary Board of Governors, press release, “University of Calgary Board of Governors launches independent 
review” (6 November 2016),. 
2 University of Calgary Board of Governors, press release, “Board of Governors Committee announces details of independent 
review” (19 November 2015),. 
3 Report of the Honourable Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C., Barrister and Solicitor, to the Board of Governors of the University of 
Calgary (14 December 2015), p 1. As of 23 February 2017, the McMahon report appeared no longer to be available on the 
University Calgary’s website; we have a copy on file.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
1. We think it misleading to characterize the review as “independent” of the University of Calgary 
considering that it was established, mandated, and staffed by the University’s Board or a Board 
committee or by the Board’s counsel. 
2. The review and resulting report did not come with an acknowledgment and discussion by 
McMahon of the central role of academic freedom at universities, at the University of Calgary in 
particular, or in relation to concerns expressed about the Enbridge Centre. The evident lack of 
appreciation of the central role of academic freedom appears to us to have affected and limited in a 
significant way the findings and conclusions of the McMahon review.
3. Conclusions reached in the McMahon report, in light of the available factual information, appear 
repeatedly to have given the benefit of the doubt to senior University officials. In contrast, two 
named individuals, Joe Arvai and Len Waverman, appear not to have received a similar benefit of 
the doubt but were instead the subject of damaging criticism in the report.
4. The review process was premised on non-disclosure of the sources of information that was 
adverse to individuals who had raised concerns about or were otherwise involved in the Enbridge 
Centre. Yet the review goes on to identify and draw negative conclusions about those individuals. 
We think that this process, especially its selective approach to confidentiality, was inconsistent with 
principles of fairness and thoroughness. Based on our review of the available information and the 
McMahon report, we think the negative conclusions or comments by McMahon – about Joe Arvai, 
Len Wavermen, and unnamed but identifiable organizations that had criticized the University – 
should be disregarded.
We explain these criticisms in more detail below.
III. Our requests for disclosure related to the McMahon review
To be fair and comprehensive in our investigation, we sought disclosure from former Justice 
McMahon and from President Cannon of information considered by McMahon in his review. We took 
this step after noting the Board of Governors’ announcement of the review on November 19, 2015 
in which it was stated that the Board was “committed to an open and transparent process.”4 In 
addition, we filed a formal request for information from the University pursuant to the FOIP Act 
although we also indicated to President Cannon that we would welcome disclosures outside of the 
University’s formal and legally mandated process for freedom of information.
In reply to our request for information, former Justice McMahon referred us to the University 
Board’s external counsel, Phyllis Smith,5 who in turn informed us that McMahon had not retained 
any of the records we requested; that, in any event, they would not be produced to us; and that 
names of individuals who may have approached him in his investigation but who were not listed as 
interviewees in his report would not be produced to us.6 A reply on behalf of President Cannon 
indicated that our request would be dealt with through the University’s formal freedom of 
information process.7 In November 2016, we received a disclosure in response to our formal FOIP 
request that included useful information, but, critically, did not include all information submitted by
4 University of Calgary Board of Governors, press release, “Board of Governors Committee announces details of independent 
review” (19 November 2015), 
details-independent-review. 
5 Email of May 20, 2016, from Terrence F. McMahon, Q.C. 
6 Letter of June 7, 2016, from Phillis A. Smith. 
7 Email of July 8, 2016, from Jo-Ann Bance, Executive Director, Office of the President, University of Calgary.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
U of C officials to the McMahon review or in the custody and control of McMahon or the University’s 
external counsel. 
Due to the non-disclosure of information considered in the McMahon review, we have been unable 
to compare comprehensively the information provided by the University or other officials to 
McMahon, on the one hand, to information available to us on the other hand. That said, in our 
examination of the McMahon report, we were able to rely on the extensive record arising from 
University FOIP disclosures pre-dating the McMahon review. We were also able to rely on 
interviews we conducted at the University and elsewhere, as discussed in our report.
IV. Differing mandates
Our review had a different mandate from that of former Justice McMahon.8 The purpose of the 
McMahon review was to examine the circumstances surrounding the creation and operation of the 
Centre and determine whether there was any breach of University policies or procedures then in 
place, or improper conduct in connection with the creation and operation of the Centre. McMahon 
was also asked several specific questions about the conduct of University officials in relation to the 
negotiation with Enbridge and operation of the Centre, the involvement of Enbridge in the Centre 
and any compromise of academic freedom arising from that involvement, any direct or indirect 
breach of the University’s policies or procedures, and any changes to the University’s policies and 
procedures in matters relevant to the subject matter of the review.
Our mandate overlapped extensively with that of the McMahon review, as we were referred to 
concerns about conflict of interest, academic freedom, and inappropriate external interference in 
relation to the Enbridge Centre. Our mandate was also more open-ended; unlike those of former 
Justice McMahon, our determinations concerning improper conduct were not limited to possible 
breaches of University Policies or Procedures, for example. Also, our mandate included a broadly 
worded reference to “other issues” of conflict of interest, governance, academic freedom, and the 
management of donations at the University of Calgary that might arise in the investigation. Former 
Justice McMahon confirmed in his report that he understood his mandate to be “confined to the 
four specific questions” laid out in his terms of reference and that other questions that might arise 
were “for another time”.9
V. Differing approaches to academic freedom
As our report indicates, we have approached academic freedom, in tandem with potential conflict of 
interest, as a central concern in relation to the Enbridge Centre. In contrast, the nature, 
importance, and role of academic freedom were not discussed in the McMahon report. Former 
Justice McMahon mentions academic freedom rarely and does not indicate that he was guided by 
the principles of academic freedom at any point, nor does he explain or describe what those 
principles meant to him.
For example, in his conclusions about whether University officials had engaged in “improper” 
conduct in relation to the Centre, McMahon states that he took the term “improper” to mean 
“contrary to University Policies or Procedures, contrary to sound business practice, or contrary to 
the reasonable expectations of reasonable and knowledgeable people.”10 There is no mention of 
academic freedom in this description of potentially improper conduct in relation to the Centre. By 
our reading, this approach means that any conduct found by McMahon to have been contrary to a
8 McMahon report, Appendix A. 
9 McMahon report, p 1. 
10 McMahon report, p 13.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
principle of academic freedom would not amount to improper conduct in his report unless it fit into 
one of the other three categories. In other words, the role of academic freedom was assimilated or 
subordinated to institutional policy and processes, commercial practice, and the notion of 
“reasonable people” without specifying in what ways such people are “knowledgeable” about 
academic freedom or how it can be violated.
Besides this definitional question, there is no discussion of the principles of academic freedom in 
the McMahon report. Where the term is mentioned, on five occasions in the 17-page report, it is 
dealt with in a presumptive or perfunctory manner. The first mention comes in passing in a 
description of concerns raised by others about the conduct of University officials in relation to the 
Centre.11 The other four mentions come in summary statements by McMahon about his views or 
conclusions that academic freedom was not violated. One of these mentions comes when McMahon 
accepts as “the fairest,” with very little discussion, an interviewee’s view that the naming of the 
Enbridge Centre “had nothing to do with academic freedom or institutional independence.”12 Two 
others come when McMahon states his view that email correspondence between Joe Arvai and 
University officials did not have “a hint of an encroachment or a threat to academic freedom” and 
when he describes the Enbridge agreement as having “no avenue for inappropriate influence or 
interference with academic research or freedom.”13 The remaining mention comes at the end of the 
McMahon report, when he refers to academic freedom in a general conclusory statement that 
“[n]one of the involvement by Enbridge as described above resulted in any encroachment upon or 
compromise of the academic freedom of the University or its staff.”14
It is significant to us that, even while making broad claims about it, McMahon did not discuss 
academic freedom, its meaning, its importance in a university, the responsibilities it entails for 
University officials, or the ways in which it may be violated by University officials or outside actors. 
We suggest that a discussion of at least some of these topics is an important step when drawing 
conclusions about whether academic freedom has been violated.
In the present case, academic freedom had been raised explicitly as a topic of concern in one of the 
four questions put to former Justice McMahon, which asked whether Enbridge’s involvement in the 
Centre compromised the academic freedom of University staff members involved in the Centre. 
Also, academic freedom was arguably raised implicitly by other questions put to McMahon about the 
conduct of University officials in relation to the Centre and about University policies. Finally, the 
very limited discussion of academic freedom in the McMahon report contrasts with statements by 
the chair of the University Board’s committee, Mark Starratt, publicized in a press release by the 
Board announcing the review. That press release states that questions had been raised about the 
Centre and “the potential infringement of academic freedom of those involved,” that “academic 
freedom is a fundamental value of all universities,” and that the Board intended for the review to 
make findings and recommendations “that will address the questions that have been raised, and 
enhance transparency.”15 
We trust that former Justice McMahon turned his mind to the question of academic freedom at 
some level, having used the term to state his views and conclusions. Yet we see little indication
11 McMahon report, p 4. “There were several points of discussion between the parties both before and after the [Enbridge] 
agreement was signed, that have since been characterized as improper, inappropriate or a risk to academic freedom.” 
12 McMahon report, p 4. 
13 McMahon report, p 11. 
14 McMahon report, p 15. 
15University of Calgary Board of Governors, press release, “University of Calgary Board of Governors launches independent 
review” (6 November 2016), 
governors-launches-independent-review 
calgary-board-governors-launches-independent-review.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
that he weighed the information available to him against any elaborated understanding of what 
academic freedom means and how it is achieved and of how it might be open to threat in the 
administration of a university. Missing from the report, as we read it, is the assessment one would 
expect to find in between, on the one hand, McMahon’s and the Board’s outlining of concerns about 
academic freedom and, on the other hand, McMahon’s conclusions about whether academic 
freedom was violated. This gap in the reasoning is concerning mainly because of other content of 
the McMahon report but also because McMahon himself, despite his wealth of legal and judicial 
experience, is not an academic and does not appear to have a personal record of acculturation in or 
commitment to academic freedom. 
VI. Differences in our assessments 
Academic freedom was the raison d’être of our investigation, whereas it appears not to have played 
a central role for former Justice McMahon. The following are examples. 
Potential conflict between private sponsorship and academic freedom 
Former Justice McMahon states that Enbridge’s funding of the University was a “sponsorship,” not a 
“gift.” From his perspective, this distinction was significant because a sponsorship, unlike a gift, 
“entitles a donor to whatever recognitions and benefits may be agreed” between the university and 
that donor. Framed in this way, the key question then becomes whether senior leadership of the 
university have met a responsibility to ensure that commitments to donors are met. 
From our perspective, the key question is different. It is whether “recognitions and benefits” 
associated with outside funding amount to or lead to unacceptable intrusions into the research, 
teaching, and administrative freedom of the university’s staff and students, including their ability to 
determine academic priorities without undue influence by a donor. Former Justice McMahon does 
not seem to have been concerned about this potential threat to academic freedom. Indeed, he 
does not mention the possibility that a sponsor or a donor may demand and receive conditions that 
infringe on academic freedom or otherwise undermine the institutional integrity of the university. 
Yet McMahon does take time to address more peripheral issues such as whether different types of 
donors would receive a tax receipt. 
This omission of a discussion of academic freedom from McMahon’s assessment elides the conflict 
that can arise between academic freedom and conditional private financing of a university research 
centre. 
Potential conflict between academic freedom and donor publicity 
Drawing on his interview with the University’s Director of Development, former Justice McMahon 
expresses the view that “there is nothing wrong with a donor seeking positive publicity from a 
donation.” 
It is challenging to assess this ambiguous statement. If McMahon means that good publicity for a 
donor is acceptable in relation to the mere announcement of a donation, with acceptable academic 
conditions, then it makes sense to us. Yet if McMahon means that good publicity is acceptable as a 
condition in itself of the donation, then the statement is very troubling from the perspective of 
academic freedom. For example, it is incompatible with academic freedom for a private donor to 
expect, as a condition of their donation, that academic researchers at a university will ensure that 
their research activities present the donor in a positive light.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
Suffice it to say that the lack of explanation by McMahon on this point makes it difficult to evaluate 
his conclusions. It also suggests that he did not thoroughly consider how private funding could, and 
often does, conflict with academic freedom. 
Indeed, when discussing the prospect of good publicity for Enbridge, McMahon says that “[a] 
corporate donor is responsible to its shareholders for its expenditures” and that, because 
Enbridge’s funding was a sponsorship not a gift, “the Enbridge Board had to be able to justify 
committing to” its payment to the University. McMahon continues: “[t]hat justification was to be 
found in repair to a damaged public image in Michigan and to reinforcement of its considerable 
stature in Calgary.” These statements suggest that McMahon accepted that a private donor could 
and indeed should expect a university, as a condition of the funding, to alter its academic activities 
in order to support the donor’s public relations goals. If that was his view, we think it entirely 
incompatible with academic freedom, including the freedom to set priorities, carry out research, 
and report findings without being influenced by how those decisions will affect a donor’s reputation. 
In the same vein, McMahon states that Enbridge’s motivation – to enhance its image in Michigan 
and Calgary – did not have “any negative impact on the university or its academic programs.” We 
disagree and think that this statement indicates a lack of appreciation for how a university’s 
reputation can be damaged if there is a reasonable basis to suspect that its academic activities 
have been shaped by a private donor’s own priorities. 
Similarly, McMahon expresses the view that “[a]n intent to enhance the donor’s reputation can and 
usually does easily co-exist with a genuine intent to benefit one’s community.” The more germane 
point, we think, is that a donor’s “intent to enhance” its reputation, where it amounts to an express 
or implicit condition for the donation, does not “easily co-exist” with a university’s reputation for 
reliable and independent research, especially in areas where academic research may harm the 
donor’s reputation. McMahon does not mention this potential contradiction between academic 
freedom and external funding. 
Potential conflict between President Cannon’s dual role and academic freedom 
Former Justice McMahon states that there is no indication in any of the documents he reviewed 
that President Cannon was involved “in any way” with the “operation,” among other things, of the 
Centre. Yet the FOIP materials we reviewed make clear that President Cannon took steps to involve 
herself precisely in the Centre’s operation and that these steps are reasonably viewed to have put 
direct pressure on the Dean of the Haskayne School of Business and, through him, indirect 
pressure on the Centre’s academic director for the purpose of accommodating Enbridge’s priorities. 
McMahon also characterizes any efforts by President Cannon to encourage academic staff to 
support Enbridge’s priorities as a case of “doing what Presidents do.” He cites an open-ended 
statement by the University of the President’s role as including “[d]eveloping and maintaining 
positive and productive relationships with stakeholders.”16 With respect, this characterization of a 
university president’s role is clearly incomplete if one takes seriously the principles of academic 
freedom. A president may be expected to maintain positive relations with donors. Yet he or she 
also has a fundamental responsibility to ensure that those relations do not compromise academic 
freedom and the core research and teaching missions of the university.
16 McMahon report, p 7-8.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
McMahon also draws the conclusion that President Cannon’s conduct “in matters arising from the 
operation of the Enbridge Centre” was “proper, responsible and required of her as President to 
protect the reputation of the University of Calgary as an institution that honours its commitments.” 
Yet he does not mention the President’s responsibility to protect the University’s reputation by 
safeguarding academic freedom in the face of pressure to appease donors.17 Thus, he does not 
address the issue that a university that “honours its commitments to donors” may, in doing so, 
dilute or abandon its commitment to the independence and integrity of its faculty, and thus 
sacrifice its academic reputation. McMahon’s handling of this issue downgrades the position that 
must be afforded to academic freedom in a well-run university. 
Clearly, we reached different assessments from those of former Justice McMahon after reviewing a 
similar record. The conduct of senior University officials in this case was very troubling for us, 
where, for McMahon, it was not troubling at all. Our different assessments may or may not be 
explained by our differing approaches to academic freedom. Regardless, we respectfully disagree 
with many of McMahon’s views and conclusions. 
VII. Differing characterizations of factual information 
We now turn to specific illustrations of how our characterizations of factual information differed 
from those of former Justice McMahon. In our view, former Justice McMahon frequently gave the 
benefit of the doubt to senior University officials – especially President Cannon and, to a lesser 
extent, Board member and former Enbridge Vice-President Bonnie DuPont – while being much 
more critical of Joe Arvai, the Centre’s academic director, and Leonard Waverman, the Dean of the 
Business School at the time of Arvai’s tenure as director. 
We provide below some examples of McMahon’s favourable treatment of senior officials and then of 
his comparatively unfavourable treatment of Arvai, Waverman, and “unnamed organizations.” As 
we discuss later in this review, we think that McMahon’s negative comments about Arvai, 
Waverman, and unnamed organizations were unfair and should be disregarded. 
1. Characterizations by McMahon that were favourable to senior University officials 
President Cannon’s statement about her Enbridge board membership 
As discussed in our main report, Elizabeth Cannon, while President of the University, held a highly 
remunerated position on an Enbridge board. In one or her emails to then Dean of the Business 
School, Leonard Waverman, President Cannon indicated that she wanted to have a good 
relationship with Enbridge, apparently out of an interest to secure future funding, and that she was 
“on one of their Boards!” 
In the McMahon report, President Cannon’s statement that she was on an Enbridge board is 
interpreted favourably – as a disclosure by the president of her role at Enbridge and as a message 
that she was communicating to Waverman, at the time, solely in her role as university president. 
Yet the statement from President Cannon is clearly open to other interpretations. 
For example, neither we nor McMahon can know how academic staff would react to being informed 
that she had noted her personal role at Enbridge when communicating internally about the Centre. 
We think it reasonable to expect that staff might assume that Cannon’s Enbridge role was not
17 McMahon report, p 9.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
entirely ring-fenced from her role as president – indeed, they could reasonably assume that a 
university president who sits on an external corporate donor’s board will be especially interested in 
the donor’s priorities at the university. 
Similarly, President Cannon’s statement (emphasized by an exclamation mark) could reasonably be 
taken by Waverman as a reminder from the president that she was committed to Enbridge’s cause 
as a result of her connection, even if that cause was thought to conflict with academic priorities at 
the university. For a reasonable administrator, the knowledge that one’s superior is a member of 
an external corporate board at least raises the possibility that she is interested in favouring the 
corporation that pays her. 
These and other less favourable interpretations of President Cannon’s statement were not 
mentioned in the McMahon report. We think it an over-reach, therefore, for McMahon to conclude 
that “[t]he only reasonable conclusion to draw from this intervention by Dr. Cannon” was that “she 
was responding to an obligation as President to persuade a Dean to do his job; to put in place a 
Director; and to undertake some academic activity within the mandate of the Enbridge Centre.” 
The president’s statement is clearly open to other reasonable interpretations, including that she 
wanted to convey that she was connected personally to Enbridge, that she wished to maintain that 
connection and the associated remuneration, that she was keen to get more funding from 
Enbridge, and that, for any or all of these reasons, she expected Waverman to ensure that 
Enbridge’s priorities were met. 
Bonnie DuPont’s conveying of Enbridge concerns 
Enbridge’s concerns about the Centre were communicated to President Cannon by U of C Board 
member and former Enbridge Vice-President Bonnie DuPont. Former Justice McMahon stated in his 
report that “Dr. Cannon had no communication with Enbridge [on Enbridge’s concerns as relayed to 
her by DuPont] at any time”. Yet that conclusion does not necessarily follow from McMahon’s 
subsequent reasoning that “[t]here is no paper trail indicating otherwise.” Simply, McMahon may 
not have been privy to communications involving Enbridge that were not reflected in the record 
available to him. By drawing the conclusion he does, McMahon elides his limited ability to gather all 
of the relevant information. He also does not discuss the issue that DuPont, due to her former role 
at Enbridge, may have served as a natural go-between between Cannon and Enbridge. 
An unanswered question, which we would have put to President Cannon and Ms. DuPont if allowed 
the opportunity, is why DuPont thought it appropriate to express concerns at all to Cannon about 
the Centre, considering the prospect that DuPont would be seen to have had a conflict of interest 
arising from her own past role at Enbridge. McMahon does not raise this question in his report. 
President Cannon’s role as U of C president and Enbridge board member 
Former Justice McMahon concluded that President Cannon did not involve herself in “the operations 
or activities” of the Enbridge Centre, leading him to conclude that President Cannon need not have 
recused herself from any contact with then Dean Leonard Waverman about the Centre.18 Here, 
McMahon is presumably referring to the issue of whether Cannon, as a paid Enbridge board 
member, should have declined to use her presidential office in any dealings with the Centre.
18 McMahon report, p 8.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
We have a different view on this point. We think that President Cannon, due to her dual role as 
Enbridge board member and U of C president, had no choice but to avoid any contact, direct or 
indirect, with academic staff responsible for the Centre. Otherwise, she risked an unavoidable 
perception that she was using her Presidential office to appease a donor who was paying her 
directly for services rendered elsewhere. Instead, Cannon exacerbated the problem of her dual role 
by involving herself directly in decision-making about the Centre. Likewise, we find it hard to 
understand how the President’s intervention with Waverman on issues of staffing at the Centre can 
be said not to have involved her in the Centre’s “operations” or “activities.” 
President Cannon’s resignation from the Enbridge board 
Another example of how President Cannon was given the benefit of the doubt in the McMahon 
report came when McMahon discusses her decision to resign from the Enbridge board. That 
decision, he says, was “in response to media coverage” of the Centre. McMahon interprets the 
decision positively, stating that “no negative inference can be reasonably drawn from that gesture.” 
Yet it is possible and we think reasonable to infer that President Cannon withdrew from the 
Enbridge board for other reasons. For example, she or others at the University may have thought 
that media investigations into the Centre had exposed an untenable conflict of interest in Cannon’s 
dual role as president and Enbridge board member. This less favourable conclusion was dismissed 
in the McMahon report on the ambiguous basis that it was not “reasonable,” without further 
explanation. It is another example of how McMahon portrayed Cannon’s conduct in a positive light 
and ignored less favourable interpretations. 
2. Characterizations by McMahon that were unfavourable to other individuals and organizations 
Questioning of Joe Arvai’s ability to run a “neutral” academic forum 
Former Justice McMahon notes that, at the time of Dr. Arvai’s appointment as Academic Director of 
the Centre, then-Dean Leonard Waverman was “aware… of some of Dr. Arvai’s negative views 
regarding pipelines and the oil sands development.” McMahon then commented that Waverman 
“does not appear to have considered whether Dr. Arvai’s interests were consistent with the 
objectives of the proposed centre, that is to establish a neutral academic forum.” 
Thus, McMahon implies, based on his negative inference about Waverman’s statement, that Arvai 
may have lacked neutrality because of opinions he expressed. McMahon’s comment goes further, 
suggesting that the Centre’s objective may be undermined if its academic director were to be 
critical of oil pipelines. McMahon seems either not to see or to undervalue the distinction between 
the freedom and responsibility of an academic to express evidence-based views and the public 
relations priorities of a private donor. 
Negative comments about then-Dean Leonard Waverman 
Former Justice McMahon also casts aspersions on then-Dean of the Haskayne Business School 
Leonard Waverman. Indeed, Waverman comes across in the McMahon report largely as 
unmotivated or disorganized in his supervision of the Centre. 
For example, McMahon states that “[t]here is no paper evidence of a search process for a Director” 
prior to Joe Arvai’s appointment after he was enlisted by Waverman. McMahon then comments that
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
“Dr. Arvai was close at hand and available.”19 In the absence of a paper trail to the contrary, 
McMahon implies that Waverman appointed Arvai because it was the easy thing to do. Similarly, 
when Waverman later urged Arvai not to resign as director, McMahon attributes this action to 
Waverman’s lack of initiative, not to any confidence on his part in Arvai or to a defence of Arvai as 
the Centre’s director. According to McMahon, “[it] can be inferred from the records that the easier 
solution for Dean Waverman was to leave Dr. Arvai in place and hope for the best.” We ask, the 
“best” for whom? McMahon is silent on the matter of decanal responsibility to support the academic 
freedom and intellectual authority of a faculty member in the business school he led. Further, after 
Arvai left the Centre and another Haskayne professor was chosen to replace him, McMahon 
comments that, “[o]nce again, inertia seems to have enveloped the Dean.” McMahon also states 
that, immediately before Arvai’s departure, “[t]here is no evidence that the Dean had a Plan B” and 
that Waverman’s handling of the matter with Enbridge did not reflect “good donor stewardship.” 
Finally, in his concluding assessment that nothing on Waverman’s part amounted to improper 
conduct, McMahon maligns Waverman by stating that the history “infers a lack of attention and a 
disinclination to take the lead and accept responsibility.”20 
These statements by McMahon clearly were harmful to Waverman’s reputation and did not give 
Waverman the benefit of the doubt or degree of credence that McMahon extended to President 
Cannon. 
Negative comments about Joe Arvai’s state of mind 
Former Justice McMahon also draws negative conclusions about the Centre’s former director, Joe 
Arvai. Arvai was a key source of criticism of the University’s handling of the Centre and Enbridge’s 
role. For example, based on his view of “the record” (it is not clear whether McMahon is referring to 
the FOIP record alone or other information provided by interviewees), McMahon makes negative 
comments about Arvai’s state of mind. According to McMahon, “the record plainly shows” Dr. 
Arvai’s “mistrust” of Enbridge and its motivations; also, according to McMahon, Arvai “anticipated 
that Enbridge would interfere with his role as Director and with the academic activities of the 
Centre.”21 
Yet the record before us – including our interview with Arvai, who recalled giving similar 
information to McMahon – can reasonably be described as showing that Arvai engaged 
constructively in his role as the Centre’s director and repeatedly attempted to find common ground 
with Enbridge in developing an academic forum that was open to different perspectives on pipelines 
or Enbridge. Why then does McMahon instead speak of Arvai having a negative attitude toward 
Enbridge? It is not clear to us, and McMahon does not elaborate on details from the record to 
support his claims about Arvai’s state of mind. 
Negative comments about Joe Arvai’s commitment to the Centre 
Similar to his treatment of Leonard Waverman, former Justice McMahon maligns Joe Arvai by 
characterizing him as insufficiently committed to the Enbridge Centre. According to McMahon, “Dr. 
Arvai had many other interests” and “travelled frequently”. As a result, Arvai was “in no position to 
invest the time necessary to craft an appropriate program for the centre, and so it did not get 
done.” 
19 McMahon report, p 9. 
20 McMahon report, p 10. 
21 McMahon report, p 9.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
Further, McMahon raises “concerns” – not attributed to any named person or organization – about 
the hiring of Arvai’s wife as the Centre’s associate director. Although he notes the absence of any 
evidence that Arvai played an improper role in the hiring of his wife, McMahon comments that 
“[o]ne might wonder about the wisdom of hiring Dr. Arvai’s wife at a time when Dr. Arvai had 
repeatedly threatened to leave.” It is curious that McMahon mentions this concern, but not the 
comparable issue of the wisdom of President Cannon receiving payment for sitting on an Enbridge 
board while in a position to use her presidential office to advance Enbridge’s interests. 
Despite his negative comments, McMahon concluded that Arvai’s conduct was not improper. 
According to McMahon, Arvai and Waverman simply did not give the Centre “the time and attention 
it required.”22 In this respect, McMahon does not discuss other, more favourable possibilities, such 
as that Arvai and Waverman had busy, successful careers with many demands on their time, or 
that their time and attention were frustrated for much of 2011 by Enbridge’s myriad demands 
regarding the ECCS. He does not give them the benefit of the doubt when the Centre’s activities 
did not proceed as quickly as the donor may have preferred. Nor does he mention that Enbridge’s 
donation was not enough to cover the salary of a full-time academic director for the Centre or that 
the expectations of Enbridge or President Cannon may have been unrealistic to the extent that they 
depended on a substantial subsidy for the Centre from general university resources and staff. 
Questioning of Arvai’s appointment and position as director 
When discussing Joe Arvai, former Justice McMahon states that the “obvious question that arises 
from a review of the records” is “why did Dr. Arvai accept or retain his position as director of the 
Centre?” Yet that question seems obvious to us only if one accepts McMahon’s unsupported claims 
that Arvai mistrusted Enbridge before and while he served as the Centre’s director. Indeed, the 
question is close to irrelevant if one reads the available record differently, as we do. From the 
record before us, we have observed that Arvai was eager to contribute to his new University after 
relocating to Calgary with his family, that he 
responded favourably to the Dean’s request to act as the Centre’s director, that he worked hard to 
make the Centre a forum for objective and independent research, and that he took seriously his 
responsibility to protect the Centre’s academic role. 
Criticism of organizations with “their own agenda” 
Former Justice McMahon asserts in his report that organizations who raised “serious allegations”, in 
his words, about President Cannon’s apparent conflict of interest had “their own agenda.”23 He did 
not name the organizations in question, although it seems fairly straightforward for a reader to 
identify the prime candidates based on the public debate on that point. In any event, McMahon did 
not substantiate this maligning statement about the relevant organizations, providing another 
example of how he declined to lend credence to sources that had expressed concerns about 
academic freedom or conflict of interest at the University. 
VII. Concerns about the process of the McMahon review 
We have additional concerns about the process of the McMahon review.
22 McMahon report, p 12. 
23 McMahon report, p 5.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
We are particularly concerned that McMahon named in his report two individuals, Joe Arvai and 
Leonard Waverman, who had raised concerns about the Centre or acted at a lower level in the 
University hierarchy than President Cannon and other senior officials. The named individuals are 
discussed at length and criticized in the McMahon report. 
In contrast, McMahon did not name other individuals who supplied information to him. In doing so, 
his process gave University and Enbridge officials an opportunity to convey, under a cloak of 
confidentiality, information to McMahon that was potentially adverse to Arvai, Waverman, or 
others. McMahon’s negative comments about Arvai, Waverman and others were then published by 
the University. 
Selective approach to identification of individuals 
In his terms of reference, McMahon was directed by the University’s Board of Governors to “protect 
the privacy of those persons interviewed” and to not “refer to any such person by name in the 
report or in a fashion that will permit identification.” The Board indicated some exceptions where 
permission was specifically granted or where “it is necessary and critical” to McMahon’s findings 
“that the names of such individuals be referred to” in his report. 
McMahon states in his report that “in most cases” he did not attribute information to specific 
individuals, except where it was necessary to explain an email. He did so recognizing that his 
review “was not an adversarial process” and that there were not “opposing and clearly articulated 
positions”. He also noted that “the affected persons” and the University were “aware of the public 
and media attention that has been generated and the importance of this review”. 
From these statements, it is unclear to us how McMahon decided to name some individuals and not 
others. We accept that there may be legitimate concerns about privacy in any review; we ourselves 
have taken care to protect individuals’ identities where requested to do so, especially to address 
concerns we heard from individuals about possible reprisals from the university administration. We 
also have not named any individuals without permission, except where their relevant conduct or 
statements are already a matter of public record. 
Our doubts about the McMahon review’s process arise from his selective naming of some 
individuals – especially when criticizing Arvai and Waverman – without also naming other 
individuals who may have provided information to McMahon that was adverse to Arvai or 
Waverman. Before making statements that were harmful to the reputations of Arvai, Waverman, 
and organizations, McMahon should in principle have given those persons or organizations an 
opportunity to know the source of any adverse information and to reply to it. 
Consequent unfairness and lack of thoroughness 
The upshot of this selective approach to confidentiality is that former Justice McMahon may have 
criticized individuals based on information from others whose identity was unknown to those who 
were criticized and to the public. It is a matter of fairness and thoroughness, we think, to allow an 
individual or organization to be informed about and to reply to allegations against them. Even if the 
matters examined by McMahon were not part of a formal adversarial dispute, as he notes, that 
does not mean that principles of fairness are inapplicable. Put differently, while the process used by 
McMahon was not adversarial, the position of some individuals clearly was potentially adverse to 
that of Enbridge and senior University officials.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
There were various instances in which McMahon criticizes individuals or organizations. In summary: 
 
He states that Leonard Waverman had “a lack of attention and a disinclination to take the lead 
and accept responsibility.” 
 
He states that Joe Arvai had “mistrust of Enbridge and its motivations,” was “in no position to 
invest the time necessary to craft an appropriate program for the centre,” and, along with 
Waverman, did not give the Centre “the time and attention it required.”24 
 
He states that unnamed organizations that had criticized President Cannon had “their own 
agenda” without further specifics and without substantiating the claim.
McMahon also identified in his report Professor Sandra Hoenle – then President of the University of 
Calgary Faculty Association – as someone who had raised concerns publicly about the Enbridge 
Centre and who was contacted for his review, but, he stated, “no interview occurred.”25 
In fairness to Hoenle, we think it should be reported that, although she declined an interview with 
McMahon, she did in fact submit a written statement to him after being asked to provide input. 
McMahon did not mention the contents of that statement or the fact that it was submitted. As a 
result, the McMahon report could leave an erroneous impression that Professor Hoenle refused to 
participate in his review. 
With her permission, we have reproduced below Professor Hoenle’s statement to McMahon, which 
she shared with us at our request:
I have consulted with the Faculty Association Executive, and we would submit that the 
behaviour of President Cannon with regard to the Enbridge Centre was inappropriate. While 
she followed the letter of Conflict of Interest guidelines by disclosing both her directorship 
role of Enbridge’s income fund and the personal compensation she received in that role, she 
should have recused herself from any involvement in the “operation and activities of the 
Centre.” 
As a former academic, Dr. Cannon would surely know what is and is not appropriate in a 
conflict of interest situation: no participation in any action or comment in any situation 
where that conflict of interest exists. On at least one documented instance, this was not the 
case; namely her email to the (then) Dean of the Haskayne School of Business. In this 
email, dated Thursday, August 23, 2012, she provides direct instructions to make Enbridge 
“happy.” Further, while her contract allows President Cannon to sit on two corporate boards, 
that fact alone neither makes this provision of the employment contract appropriate nor 
moral. 
This statement raises important questions about President Cannon’s communication with Leonard 
Waverman about the Centre and her dual role as President and an Enbridge board member. Issues 
relevant to these questions were not addressed in the McMahon report, as we have discussed in 
the case of McMahon’s favourable treatment of President Cannon. Professor Hoenle’s written
24 McMahon report, p 12. 
25 McMahon report, Appendix B.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix A
statement demonstrates that the relevant issues were put to McMahon, allowing one to conclude 
that he decided, without explanation, not to discuss them in his report. 
Independence and transparency 
University officials described the McMahon review as “independent” and “transparent.” Yet the 
McMahon review was an investigation of the University conducted by an outside party chosen by 
the University. It was not fully independent of the University because the decision to investigate, 
the mandate, and the appointment of the investigator were in the hands of a committee 
established by the Board of Governors of the U of C. As far as we are aware, the only investigation 
of these matters that was established independently of the University, outside of media 
investigations, is ours. 
On this point, it is disappointing that the University Administration responded to our investigation 
by refusing our invitations to participate and by informing University staff that our review was by 
“an external body that has no official standing on our campus” and that the Canadian Association 
of University Teachers “does not have standing to investigate the matters set out in [our] terms of 
reference.”26 It appears from these statements that the University was unwilling to subject itself to 
the only formal investigation initiated by an entity other than the University itself. 
The University’s response to our investigation was also unhelpful at another stage. After we had 
concluded the main part of our investigation, letters were sent in confidence to various University 
officials to provide notice of potential findings of misconduct on their part and an opportunity to 
reply. In response, the Chair of the University’s Board of Governors, Mr. Gordon M. Ritchie, raised 
legitimate concerns with the CAUT about public statements by the then-chair of the Investigatory 
Committee, as we have discussed elsewhere in this report. Shortly after it communicated these 
concerns to the CAUT, and well before there was any reasonable opportunity for the Investigatory 
Committee to address the concerns, the University made the concerns public in an apparent 
attempt to discredit the Investigatory Committee as a whole. Again, it is disappointing that the 
University would take this highly oppositional and unconstructive approach to the only formal 
investigation initiated by an entity other than the University itself. 
The University also described the McMahon review process as “transparent.” Yet the McMahon 
review was based on information that is not publicly available, in spite of requests for disclosure. 
Thus, the McMahon review appears to have afforded University officials an opportunity, to 
participate and respond to concerns raised by others about the University entirely anonymously. In 
contrast, key individual or organizations who raised concerns were themselves named and 
criticized in the McMahon report. 
However one describes it, we do not find this process reassuring if the aim was to have an 
independent, thorough, and transparent account of the conduct of University officials in relation to 
the Enbridge Centre.
26 Email of 18 March 2016 from University of Calgary Provost and Vice-President (Academic) Dru Marshall to “all academic 
staff and senior leadership team members” at the University of Calgary.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
Appendix B 
Summary of Emails: Significant Actors and Timeline of Events 
SIGNIFICANT ACTORS 
University of Calgary 
Elizabeth Cannon 
President 
Bonnie DuPont 
Vice-Chair, Board of Governors 
Dru Marshall 
Provost 
Joe Arvai 
Professor, Haskayne School of Business 
Director, Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability 
Kim Kadatz 
Director of Development, Haskayne School of Business 
Leonard Waverman 
Dean, Haskayne School of Business 
Victoria Arvai 
Associate Director, Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability 
Jaydeep Balakrishnan 
Associate Dean, Haskayne School of Business 
Frances Bowen 
Director, International Resources Industries and Sustainability Centre, 
Haskayne School of Business 
Lesley DiMarzo 
Administrative Assistant to Joe Arvai 
Loren Falkenberg 
Associate Dean, Haskayne School of Business; 
Interim director, Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability 
Robin Gregory 
Advisory Board member, Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability 
Kim Lawrence 
Director, Communications and Marketing, Haskayne School of Business 
Harrie Vredenburg 
Professor and Suncor Energy Chair, Haskayne School of Business 
Affiliated with the Institute for Sustainable Energy, Environment, and 
Economy 
Enbridge 
Pat Daniel 
CEO 
Steve Wuori 
Executive Vice-President, Liquids and Pipelines 
D’Arcy Levesque 
Vice-President, Government Affairs
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
Paul Hunt 
Director, Sustainability 
Dan O’Grady 
National Manager, Community Partnerships and Investment 
Glenn Herchak 
Director of Communications, Community Relations and Investment 
Beth Diamond 
National Public Relations (working for Enbridge) 
ACRONYMS (TIMELINE OF EVENTS) 
BD 
Bonnie DuPont 
CMU 
Central Michigan University 
DM 
Dru Marshall 
DO 
Dan O’Grady 
DL 
D’Arcy Levesque 
EC 
Elizabeth Cannon 
EN 
Enbridge 
EPA 
Environmental Protection Agency (United States) 
HV 
Harrie Vredenburg 
IRIS 
Industries and Sustainability Centre 
JA 
Joe Arvai 
JB 
Jaydeep Balakrishnan 
KK 
Kim Kadatz 
KL 
Kim Lawrence 
LD 
Lesley DiMarzo 
LF 
Loren Falkenberg 
LW 
Leonard Waverman 
PH 
Paul Hunt 
RG 
Robin Gregory 
U of C University of Calgary 
UNBC University of Northern British Columbia
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
TIMELINE OF EVENTS 
MARCH 2011 
Key Events:
 
The Centre is proposed to Enbridge and initial documents are exchanged 
 
UNBC is proposed by Enbridge as potential Centre partner, U Michigan also suggested 
 
Arvai objects to U Michigan 
 
Central Michigan U (CMU) proposed by Enbridge 
 
Rationale re: CMU discussed 
Item# Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
1-3 
Kim Kadatz sends 
Dan O’Grady 
Haskayne Strategic 
Plan
“forms the framework around why this Centre naming is so important 
to our energy strategy” (KK)
1-6 
Recognition and 
Benefits For Enbridge 
List
Proposed awards will be developed in consultation with EN, “to ensure 
recipients reflect the core values important to Enbridge…”
1-7 
Recognition and 
Benefits For Enbridge 
List
“Customized opportunities to meet with researchers pursuing projects 
of interest.”
1-8 
Enbridge Centre for 
International 
Research in 
Sustainability – Initial 
Proposal to Enbridge
“This investment will build relationships with your critical stakeholders 
in a respected and neutral university-based forum. You will provide 
input into research being undertaken. You will gain first access to new 
insights… Enbridge at the core of HSB’s efforts to improve the quality 
of public debate on energy futures over the long term.” 
Offer to provide guidance about “how to maintain a social license to 
operate… and business practices to support a social license to grow.” 
1-9 
Enbridge Centre for 
International 
Research in 
Sustainability – Initial 
Proposal to Enbridge
“The outcomes will be both better research and more attention to 
what the Alberta energy sector is doing to develop resources 
sustainably.”
1-17 
1-16 
Joe Arvai Objects To 
U Michigan As 
Partner For Enbridge 
Centre. 
Leonard Waverman 
Agrees As Does 
Frances Bowen.
“Frankly, I see zero upside in coordinating with the U of M.” (JA)
1-20 
Arvai Objects To 
Exclusivity In Terms 
Of Partners And To 
Using Partners Just 
For Enbridge’s Sake.
“I understand Enbridge wants to convey a ‘We care’ image to some of 
these areas of interest but forcing it to happen as part of a donation 
agreement won’t work in my view. Bottom line: I think we need to be 
more pragmatic about how we set this up.” (JA)
1-20 
Enbridge wants as 
partners both 
University of 
Northern British 
Columbia and U 
Michigan.
“Enbridge will expect to see in the gift agreement… that the school will 
endeavor to engage with both UNBC and UMich in the work of this 
Centre. “ (KK)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
1-28 
Waverman and 
Kadatz remind Arvai 
that he needs to take 
a “positive view.”
“Joe, Getting Enbridge making a significant gift to HSB would be huge 
for us.” (LW) 
“Thanks Leonard. This is the positive view we need!” (KK)
1-47 
Arvai expresses 
confusion over which 
Michigan university is 
to be a partner. 
Kadatz discusses 
Enbridge connection.
“There are a couple of ties to Michigan – the location of the incident 
and the fact that Steve Wuori is an alumni of one of these schools – it 
may be CMU. I think their highest need is to have some presence in 
the state but Steve will be able to guide you….” (KK)
APRIL 2011 
Key Events
 
Enbridge insists on CMU, no UNBC, and name change. 
 
Enbridge approves gift. 
 
Enbridge proposes communication plan. 
 
Enbridge brings in National Public Relations to manage gift announcement. 
 
First Draft of Gift Agreement. 
 
Enbridge suggests an undergrad program. 
 
Gift announcement timed according to public relations value for Enbridge. 
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quote 
13-4-11 2-7 
Enbridge wants 
CMU.
“Enbridge’s strong preference through Steve Wuori (is) 
Central Michigan University. That university gave Enbridge 
very valuable advice on the situation they were dealing with 
last summer and Steve has stated his choice….” (KK) 
13-4-11 2-7 
Enbridge does not 
want UNBC.
“Enbridge will not be pursuing a partnership with UNBC at 
this stage based on no response from that institution.“ (KK)
13-4-11 2-7 
Enbridge suggests 
name change.
“Enbridge would like to change the name to: Enbridge 
Sustainability Research Centre vs. Enbridge Centre for 
International Research in Sustainability.” (KK) 
15-4-11 2-17 
CMU Sustainability 
Unit has a staff of 
one person.
“We ended the call with him talking about how his 
sustainability unit was small – just one person: him – and 
how he was looking to find funding so that he can expand.” 
(KK) 
18-4-11 2-22 
Enbridge approves 
gift.
“Leonard – FYI – Pat Daniel has said yes to the gift – I 
heard from Dan O’Grady today.” (KK) 
19-4-11 2-30 
Pat Daniel’s 
connections to U of 
Alberta.
“Yes this is an excellent achievement given Pat Daniel’s 
connection to UofA.” (JB)
19-4-11 2-32/33 Beth Diamond from 
National Public 
Relations brought in 
by Enbridge to 
handle gift 
announcement. U of 
Calgary to follow 
Enbridge’s lead re. 
announcement 
plan.
“The U of C have confirmed their agreement to support this 
communication plan.” (DO)
20-4-11 2-53/54 Enbridge Inc. and 
“…focus on the translation of that research knowledge to the
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
Haskayne School of 
Business 
Agreement
corporate energy sector and inform energy and 
environmental policy in North America and internationally.”
20-4-011 2-59 
Invitation to bring 
Arvai into the 
“Enbridge family.”
“the earlier we bring you into the Enbridge family to hash 
this thing out the more ahead we’ll be in the long run.” (DO) 
[emphasis added] 
26-4-11 2-76/77 Enbridge would like 
an undergrad 
program in future.
“Enbridge talked about their desire for, at some point in the 
future, an undergraduate program as part of HSB in the 
area of corporate social responsibility.” (JA) 
27-4-11 2-82 
Enbridge wants gift 
announcement for 
public relations 
value.
“they will be postponing any announcement from May 18 
until July 25 which is the first anniversary of their spill in 
Michigan. This gift announced at that time will offer more 
public relations value for them.” (KK) 
MAY 2011 
Key Events
 
Naming debate continues. Waverman encourages Arvai to take “Dan’s name” for the 
Centre. 
 
Arvai suggests spending more time at Enbridge to learn its interests. 
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
3-5-11 
3-5 
Kadatz and 
Waverman discuss 
Enbridge’s 
sensitivity and 
public relations 
concerns.
“Dan and I agreed that we need to iron out the name and 
focus before we jump to an announcement. This is very 
important for us and them but they don't like to be pushed 
and we will need to take direction from them on timing.” 
(KK) [emphasis added] 
“They were charged with coming up with a plan they feel 
will maximize PR for Enbridge. We have caused them to 
rethink…” (KK) [emphasis added] 
4-5-11 
3-20 
Waverman 
encourages Arvai 
and Kadatz to take 
name suggested by 
Enbridge
“I like the Enbridge name of Joe’s – don't want to get in the 
way of the gift agreement – take Dan’s name!” (LW to KK 
and JA) [emphasis added]
6-5-11 
3-35 
Arvai has met with 
Enbridge and they 
agree on “Social 
Responsibility.”
“The short name for the Centre would be: The Enbridge 
Centre for Social Responsibility. I like it and we can a good 
job with this. They like it too.” (JA)
18-5-11 3-64 
Arvai suggests 
spending more time 
at Enbridge.
“it might make sense for me to spend some meaningful 
time at Enbridge – maybe one day or week or two – 
learning about the company’s interests. This way, I could 
help to guide the strategic direction of the centre in the 
direction of some of Enbridge’s key areas of 
interest/influence.” (JA) [emphasis added] 
24-5-6- 
3-79 
Kadatz lets Arvai, 
Waverman and Kim 
Lawrence know 
what Enbridge’s 
concerns are and 
worries that some 
of its name
“I have heard that they may want to change the name to 
the Enbridge Centre for Sustainability and Corporate 
Leadership. I am not fond of this name as it competes with 
the Centre for Leadership that we are also working on, and 
I also believe that it appears self-serving for Enbridge. 
Please give some thought to other possible versions of the 
name.” (KK)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
suggestions re. 
“leadership” are 
self-serving 
June/July 2011 
Key Events
 
Naming issues continue. 
 
Bonnie DuPont referred to as a critical “volunteer” helping to get the deal done. 
 
Agreement is signed and finalized. 
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
1-6-11 
4-1 
Arvai thanks 
Waverman for 
meeting with his 
wife Victoria Arvai.
4-6-11 
4-2 
Waverman: Bonnie 
DuPont will handle 
name conflict with 
Enbridge.
“Bonnie DuPont will intervene for us at Enbridge on 
name….” (LW)
22-7-11 4-40 
Kadatz suggests 
meeting with 
“volunteer”’ DuPont.
“I would like to organize a meeting after summer for you 
and I and Leonard to meet with Bonnie DuPont, our 
volunteer who was critical in obtaining the commitment 
from Enbridge. She has agreed to help us with fundraising 
for the remainder of the budget.” (KK) 
27-7-11 4-48 
Agreement is signed 
and finalized. 
DuPont 
congratulates 
Kadatz on deal.
“This is great news Kim… I also had a note from Dan 
O’Grady at Enbridge letting me know the deal was done… 
very good work on the part of the team… not always an 
easy task, is it?” (BD)
August 2011 
Key Events
 
Harrie Vredenburg writes Waverman to express concerns. 
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
26-8-11 5-14 
Vredenburg writes 
Waverman with 
concerns about 
Centre, which 
“smacks of us being 
apologists for the 
fossil fuel industry.”
“It sounds to me like a classic case of ‘he who pays the 
piper calls the tunes’… Enbridge is doing too much tune 
calling, in my view, to the point that the Centre’s usefulness 
to HSB academics is being sacrificed to Enbridge’s PR 
objectives. The most brazen of this approach is the altering 
of the IRIS name itself… The Enbridge Centre of 
Corporate Sustainability… does not reflect the 
Calgary/western Canadian economy. But most damningly it 
smacks of us being apologists for the fossil fuel industry 
rather than independent scholars and teachers doing work 
in a broadly defined area. We built ISIS over 17 years now 
with strong industry support but without being seen as 
industry apologists. I’m concerned we may have stepped 
over the line….” (HV)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
September 2011 
Key Events
 
Due to his appointment to a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Science Advisory body, 
Arvai offers to step away or stay on as an adviser and hire an Executive Director for the 
Centre. Waverman strongly encourages him not to step down. 
 
Waverman seems to agree to an Executive Director position. 
 
Arvai, Kadatz, and Waverman work on terms of reference for Executive Director position. 
 
November 10 set as new launch date for Centre.
Date 
Item # 
Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
9-9/10-
11 
6-
12/11/10
Arvai expresses 
concerns re: his 
affiliation with EPA 
and Enbridge, 
wants to step 
down. 
Offers option of 
hiring an Executive 
Director and 
remaining on the 
EPA Advisory 
Board. 
Waverman does not
allow Arvai to step 
down.
“Because of my rapidly emerging research work on 
developing a national energy policy, I have concerns about 
serving as the Director of an Enbridge-named centre. My 
credibility as an honest broker would be jeopardized….” (JA)
“There is no one else – cant see how this hurts!” (LW) 
“The more I think about it, the more difficult it is for me to 
accept the terms that Enbridge has put before us. It’ll strip 
away my credibility when it comes to the kind of research 
and policy work I do best.” (JA) 
“You cant just walk away as Enbridge has been told you are 
Director and you negotiated the name…” (LW)
20-9-11 6-42 
EVENT MEMO – 
ENBRIDGE 
ANNOUNCEMENT
Under “Key Messages/Details of Gifts” #2: 
“It is expected that the initiatives supported by the Enbridge 
Centre will advance the research and development of new 
business practices and decision support processes required 
to develop natural resources in a responsible and 
sustainable manner.” 
19-9-11 6-53 
ENRIDGE CENTRE 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR TERMS 
OF REFERENCE
Under Responsibilities: 
“Disseminating the results of the Centre research in a 
format useful to the corporate energy sector and in keeping 
with what has been committed to the Sponsor in the 
Sponsorship Agreements”
October 2011 
Key Events
 
Launch event planning continues. Soft launch at U of C planned for November 10. Official 
Enbridge event set for end of January. Enbridge takes control of planning, outlines four key 
deliverables. 
 
Enbridge extremely concerned about Arvai’s appointment to EPA. Waverman tries to mollify 
Enbridge by offering DuPont as eventual director of the Centre. 
 
As Enbridge reacts to EPA issue, Arvai seems to assume he is stepping down and then 
agrees to stay on as Academic Director of the Centre. 
 
Arvai continues to express serious doubts about working with Enbridge. 
 
Enbridge cancels launch event for November 10. 
 
Enbridge wants more control over description of Executive Director role.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
30-9-11 7-2 
O’Grady weighs in 
with Kadatz on 
launch planning.
“FYI – Glenn [Herchak], Beth [Diamond] and I met briefly 
yesterday via telephone to review a few modifications/ 
clarifications to the communications/ media plan which will 
be forwarded to you soon as a revised copy. As well Kim, 
we discussed what measures will be required in order to 
ensure success for the second event… we’ve decided to 
stage a luncheon at the U of C downtown campus on Beth’s 
assurances that the facility can be enhanced to our needs… 
Going forward then we see success as being predicated on 
the following four key deliverables over the next 3 
months….” (DO) 
11-10-11 7-11 
Attempting to 
assuage concerns 
about conflicts re. 
his position on EPA 
Science Advisory 
body, Arvai pushes 
for new Executive 
Director and offers 
to stay on as 
“Faculty/ Liaison 
Advisor”.
“Knowing that I am still guiding the Centre behind the 
scenes may alleviate some of the unease that Enbridge 
feels. Likewise it would keep me free of conflicts of interest 
as it relates to my Federal Government appointment in the 
US.” (JA)
20-10-11 7-13 
Voicemail from 
Waverman to Arvai 
re. his concerns 
about Arvai leaving.
“We have a concern that Enbridge are going to pull the 
grant… I really need you to reconsider this because if it 
goes belly up my ass is on the line and I won’t feel happy 
with you either on this so do get back to me.” (LW) 
20-10-11 7-12 
Arvai agrees to stay 
on.
“I’m willing to go ahead as the academic director of the 
centre to help the school, but we need to talk about the 
pain I’m feeling at the moment.” (JA) 
20-10-11 7-14 
Emails between 
Waverman and 
DuPont, concerned 
that Enbridge will 
pull funding 
following news of 
Arvai’s EPA position. 
Waverman proposes 
DuPont take over 
the Directorship.
“They are upset, pulled the big announcement with Pat and 
Elizabeth for Nov. 10! I am concerned that the $$ are at 
risk. They want a spokesperson. What about Bonnie DuPont 
Adjunct Prof and Director… no work for you and gives you a 
platform to raise $$$.” (LW) 
“Len, I would take this on as you describe if I was not on 
the Board of Governors… but I still have a year plus a few 
months left in my term so I simply cannot do it… who do 
they want in the role?” (BD)
20-10-11 7-15 
Waverman tells 
Kadatz re. Enbridge 
sentiments about 
Arvai and EPA. 
Kadatz attempts to 
salvage things.
“the tone of the letter should be reassuring and confident… 
It would be best for all involved if we were able to salvage 
this….” (KK)
20-10-11 7-17 
Waverman writes to 
Steve Wouri at 
Enbridge, stating 
that Arvai will stay 
and EPA will allow
“Bonnie DuPont would be delighted to be Director when she 
comes off U of C Board of Governors in 14 months.” (LW)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
it. Waverman offers 
DuPont as eventual 
Director. 
25-10-11 7-27 
Waverman and U of 
C Senior Admin 
want to separate 
news of Arvai’s EPA 
appointment from 
Haskayne so as not 
to upset Enbridge. 
Kim Lawrence 
complies.
“I’ve asked them if they would consider combining the EPA 
announcement in there so that it can still be timely and yet 
not come from Haskayne… This way, the news is shared in a
timely fashion… but it’s not associating Haskayne with it 
directly, which could be an affront to Enbridge.” (KL)
25-10-11 7-29 
Arvai writes to 
Lawrence to ask 
why announcement 
about EPA has been 
delayed by Admin.
“Len (and others) need to know that I will leave HSB and U 
of C if I am held back from doing the science and outreach 
that I came to Calgary to do. The line of universities asking 
for me to move is long and distinguished. Making Enbridge 
happy isn’t on my radar in any shape or form. That said, 
there’s a way to make this work; we simply need to have 
more open lines of communication….” (JA) 
25-10-11 7-31 
Launch event 
cancelled by 
Enbridge. 
Arvai weighs in.
“I find this rather silly and beyond that, I am growing quite 
concerned about the psyche of Enbridge. I’m having a hard 
time imagining what actually working with them, after all 
these negotiations, would look (and feel) like.” (JA) 
28-10-11 7-35 
Kadatz notes 
Waverman meeting 
with Enbridge re. 
their demands for 
Director’s role.
“Please make suggested changes to it based on your 
meeting with D’Arcy Levesque to address specific 
parameters around the Director role.” (KK)
November 2011 
Key Events
 
Arvai responds to Enbridge’s demands about Director role. Enbridge continues to press on 
this. 
 
Enbridge expresses concerns about Joe Arvai’s wife being associated with Centre – demands 
a response from U of C. 
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
1-11-11 8-1 
Waverman conveys 
Enbridge demands 
to Arvai re: Director 
role.
“The Director will not have any relationships or activities 
which impinge on his or her role as Academic Lead or on his 
or her ability to speak on any issue involving the Center.” 
(LW citing EN’s demands) 
2-11-11 8-2 
Arvai reacts to 
Enbridge’s demands 
re. directorship. 
Continues to point 
out problems with 
compromise of 
academic mission.
“we need to be clear with them on what the ‘job’ is. We 
must be independent. I cant do it any other way. If they 
want a think tank/ pr group, they’ll need to come up with 
way more than 2.5$M.” (JA) 
“We cannot maintain our credibility as serious scholars/ 
researchers if the sponsors can dictate Centre’s agenda… I 
cannot serve as the Centre’s Academic Director if any of its 
sponsors are allowed to meddle in its academic activities.” 
(JA)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
“We believe it would be helpful to ensure the agreement 
clearly states that if the Director is unable to fulfill his duties 
in keeping with our agreed upon expectations, that the 
University would begin a search for suitable replacement. 
We would like your assurance that there are no unexpected 
or unknown affiliations that would prevent Joe from fulfilling 
his role as Director?... We continue to believe that the 
optics associated with Joe’s spouse serving on the Centre’s 
faculty could be challenging and would like to understand 
your position on this?” (DO) 
27-11-11 8-21 
Waverman wants 
the Centre’s Terms 
of Reference to be 
amended to include 
Enbridge’s demands.
15-11-11 8-9 
Levesque writes to 
Waverman to clarify 
Enbridge’s demands 
re. the Directorship 
and concerns.
“I’ve been going over the TOR for Enbridge Centre. They 
don't address the Enbridge issues – Director won’t have 
conflicts…Can we redo these together in the am?” (LW)
30-11-12 8-24 
O’Grady writes to 
Kadatz to reassert 
the need to address 
concerns re. Joe 
Arvai’s spouse and 
finalizing members 
of Advisory Board 
for January launch.
“I did learn that Steve [Wuori] is not supportive of Joe’s 
wife being associated with the Centre.” (DO) 
“External advisory members… (will) need to be installed by 
the launch date.” (DO)
December 2011 
Key Events
 
Kadatz and Waverman try to reassure Enbridge about Joe Arvai’s wife, Victoria Arvai. 
 
Enbridge continues to make demands prior to launch date of February 8, including a new 
one re. Banff Summit lecture series. 
 
Arvai, Waverman, and Kadatz all express concern about Enbridge using the Centre as a 
public relations tool.
Date 
Item # 
Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
Observations 
7-12-11 
9-1 
Kadatz writes to 
O’Grady re. Joe 
Arvai’s wife
“Leonard has discussed this with the 
University’s Provost and VP Academic, 
Dru Marshall, and she is confident that 
we can manage this appointment within 
the reporting structure. She assured 
Leonard that this type of conflict has 
occurred within her experience at 
universities and is typically addressed 
by the individual reporting to the dean 
or associate dean and not to their 
spouse.” (KK)
19-12-11 9-
13/12/11 
Enbridge 
continues to make 
requests to 
Kadatz and 
Waverman 
(including a
“We would like Joe to advise further 
External Board candidates in readiness 
for the planned Feb 8th event. As 
discussed, perhaps Joe can consult with 
Paul Hunt in this regard… We would like 
to see the announcement of the annual
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
seminar series) 
prior to new 
February 8 launch 
date. 
Kadatz expresses 
concerns re. date 
and Centre being 
public relations 
tool for Enbridge. 
Arvai responds to 
the demands re. 
Advisory Board 
members.
Enbridge Sustainability Summit in 
Banff… referenced in the Term of 
Reference.” (DO) 
“We need to be careful so as not to 
position the Centre as a vehicle for 
public relations for Enbridge.” (KK) 
[emphasis added] 
“I also heard a comment that Enbridge 
questioned why we had so many 
(currently 2 out of 5 members) 
“academics” on the Advisory Board. The 
answer is simple: Because we’re an 
academic centre.” (JA) 
“I am becoming increasingly uneasy 
again about how Enbridge is viewing the 
centre, namely (as Kim mentions) as a 
PR vehicle for the company… I cannot 
and will not be able to run the centre 
that way… There’s a widely held 
perception that the U of C is in the 
pocket of industry. We have a chance to 
correct that with this centre….” (JA) 
20-12-11 9-14 
Arvai continues to 
worry. Waverman 
seems to agree 
with his concerns.
“I am also concerned – I will speak to 
D’Arcy [Levesque] this week.” (LW) 
“This kept me up last night. They are 
giving us a tiny amount of money and 
are asking for way, way too much. Their 
expectations don't match their donation. 
We’re currently on the road to a 
disappointing relationship with them.” 
(JA)
January 2012 
Key Events
 
Arvai continues to balk, pleads for more administrative help. 
 
Launch date moved to March 27. 
 
National Public Relations draws up event plan. 
 
Arvai meets with Enbridge – they are “getting happy.”
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
3-1-12 
10-
1/2/3 
Discussion between 
Kadatz, O’Grady, 
and DuPont re. 
moving launch date 
to March.
3-1-12 
10-4/5 Arvai still unhappy 
and expresses this 
to Kadatz and 
Waverman. 
Waverman starts to
“I have pressed pause on the centre pending the outcome 
of a conversation with Enbridge. We all have to be 
comfortable with where we are heading with the centre and 
I have a strong sense that Enbridge is not yet comfortable 
with our arrangement. Neither am I, frankly, as I am not
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
lose patience. 
yet sure what we are signing up for. I have the impression 
that Enbridge sees the centre as a PR machine for 
themselves….” (JA) 
“This is getting out of hand. I’m doing my best to be a team 
player with an open mind in the centre. But I have no help, 
and worse, have no clue what we are trying to do anymore. 
And, honestly, I no longer have a good feeling about 
Enbridge… We need to get things straightened out.” (JA) 
“I don’t understand your concerns any more at all. What are 
you raising here?” (LW) 
10-1-12 
10-17 Kadatz 
communicates new 
launch date – March 
27.
25-1-12 
10-70 Arvai reports on his 
meeting with 
Enbridge – reports 
that they are happy 
with his plans for 
Advisory Board.
“Glad they are getting happy.” (LW)
February 2011 
Key Events
 
Preparations for launch event continue, with discussion about signage etc. 
 
Wrangling over terms of reference for Advisory Board and Academic Advisory Board and 
budget 
 
Enbridge still pushing for MOU for CMU and for mention of CMU in Pat Daniel’s remarks at 
launch, contra Arvai’s wishes
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
4-2-12 
11-19 
Waverman berates 
Joe Arvai and 
Victoria Arvai for re-
writing terms of 
reference and 
reworking Centre’s 
budget.
“Joseph, Let me be clear – you two do not have the 
authority to unilaterally rewrite the TOR or redo the 
budget.” (LW)
14-2-12 11-105 Arvai comments on 
revised terms of 
reference for 
External Advisory 
Board members and 
awards.
Under Enbridge Sustainability Awards: 
“As an academic center, I don't think we should be in the 
business of community awards. I would prefer to hand out 
two student awards.” (JA)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
“On reflection, it does make sense that we include mention 
in Pat’s remarks given the connection to CMU during the 
Michigan incident. In brief, ‘the collaboration with CMU and 
other potential organizations to ensure international 
interests are taken into account in the work of the Enbridge 
Centre’ enhances the importance of the story to include 
North American and international outreach.” (DO)
29-2-12 11-266 O’Grady writes 
Kadatz and others 
re. mention of CMU 
in Pat Daniel’s 
planned remarks at 
launch.
March 2012 
Key Events
 
Arvai threatens to quit. Waverman replies with hostility and fear. 
 
Arvai asks Enbridge to deal directly with him. Enbridge balks, wants to deal with Kadatz. 
 
Arvai again expresses exasperation, no longer wants to deal with Enbridge or the Centre. 
 
Plans for launch continue in spite of Arvai’s frustration. 
 
Arvai meets with Beth Diamond at National Public Relations around March 15 to discuss his 
remarks at launch. 
 
Waverman notifies Enbridge that Arvai is no longer Director on March 19. 
 
Loren Falkenberg brought on temporarily. 
 
Arvai wants to sit on external advisory board. Enbridge balks.
Date 
Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
7-3-12 
12-3 
Arvai resists more 
involvement for CMU 
and wants to change 
language of MOU re. 
inclusion of someone 
from CMU on Advisory 
Board.
“As you know, I am not in favour of a MOU with CMU. 
Nevertheless, I am moving forward in good faith… 
Enbridge is allowed to select one person for the Advisory 
Board, that is Paul Hunt… I am striking the language 
from the draft MOU with CMU.” (JA) 
“I cant accept that – you need to speak to Enbridge. We 
are about ‘transparency’ at the centre – Wuori will be 
upset.” (LW) 
“I’ve made it clear from the beginning, I’m living up to 
the letter of the law in the sponsorship agreement with 
respect to CMU. But no further… Also know that this is 
non-negotiable for me….” (JA) 
7-3-12 
12-104 Waverman forwards 
exchange to Kadatz.
Re. JA - “Amazing ego and royal pain.” (LW)
8-3-12 
12-6 
Waverman responds 
to Arvai’s email to 
O’Grady re. position 
on CMU and plan for 
Pat Daniel to mention 
it in his launch 
remarks. 
O’Grady writes 
directly to Kadatz to 
express concern. 
Kadatz pleads to Arvai 
and Waverman that 
they need to be a
“I’m a bit concerned with Joe’s email below where he has 
not copied your team at the U of C. As you know, CMU is 
in the agreement with a strong internal expectation that 
this will happen….” (DO) 
“ Joe, You need to go along with Enbridge – the monies 
we give CMU are tiny – it won’t be viewed as a payoff, 
your constant pushing is unsettling to me – I feel I am 
undermined with this email. Putting these issues in 
writing like this jeopardizes our relationship with 
Enbridge. I thought you were going to meet with them. I 
am tired of dealing with this – Elizabeth [Cannon] will 
have a fit if she sees this.” (LW)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
“united front.” 
Waverman less 
diplomatic to Arvai. 
8-3-12 
12-9 
Arvai wants to quit 
Centre. Waverman 
threatens that Centre 
will close if he does.
“Len, can we talk? I feel I can no longer continue as the 
Director of the Centre….” (JA) 
“Joseph, If you pull out now – weeks before the public 
launch – my head is taken off my shoulders – the Centre 
is likely closed.” (LW) 
8-3-12 
12-14 
Kadatz lets Victoria 
Arvai know that 
Enbridge wants reps 
from CMU at launch.
“Enbridge would like a few folks invited to the March 27th 
event from CMU – do you have any names there?”
9-3-12 
12-
24/25 
Joe Arvai concerned 
that Enbridge always 
prefers to work with 
Kadatz. Waverman 
agrees, writes to 
Kadatz. Kadatz agrees 
to back off.
“I’ve noticed a pattern that is troubling and I’d like your 
opinion. Specifically, I am growing concerned that, when 
it comes to sensitive issues, Enbridge prefers to work 
with Kim [Kadatz]. I’d like to put a stop to this. When it 
comes to decisions that will affect the centre, they need 
to work with me as the Director.” (JA) 
“Kim, At this point, you and I need to step out of the 
discussions with Enbridge and leave those to Joe and 
Victoria.” (LW) 
9-3-12 
12-
30/32 
Arvai writes to 
O’Grady and asks him 
to deal directly with 
him since Centre is 
now up and running. 
O’Grady writes to 
Kadatz for clarification 
of Arvai’s request. 
Arvai loses patience 
and no longer wants 
to be associated with 
Enbridge.
“Hi Kim, So we’ll need clarification from you as you have 
always been my point of contact on this file.” (DO) 
“I will of course continue to be your contact on the 
investment, announcement, and launch event, and 
sponsorship benefits, and ongoing stewardship aspects. 
It’s the core function of the Centre, research, academic 
direction and content that Joe is referring to. Hope this 
makes sense.” (KK) 
“I’ve built a solid academic reputation and career on 
being a credible, defensible and impartial policy advisor. 
Aspects of the CMU arrangement, and this centre more 
generally, could paint me and us in a bad light. It seems 
I am one of only a small few who sees it this way. As I 
noted when we met 2 weeks ago, I’ve discussed my 
concerns with the directors of other similar centres and 
other people who work in this space share my views. I’ve 
also raised my concerns many times internally. Kim, I 
know you’ll tell me ‘its in the gift agreement’ … But 
frankly, the arrangement with this centre has been 
evolving since we started and I am, once again, growing 
less and less comfortable… I no longer wish to be the 
Director of this Centre and will no longer have my name 
associated with Enbridge. Working on this centre has cut 
deeply into my productivity, and more than that, it is 
creating major stress that is spilling over into my private 
life. It’s not worth it for me.” (JA) 
12-3-12 
12-46 
Arvai wants more 
control over 
promotional videos 
and material being
“Finally, and this is critical, as Director I will need to 
approve any video that will be used to publicly represent 
the centre on any website. Please ensure that this is clear 
internally and at National PR [Public Relations]. I don’t
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
asked for by Enbridge want any surprises vis-à-vis what gets said publicly about
this centre prior to the launch.” (JA) 
15-3-12 12-95 
Arvai still negotiating 
with Enbridge around 
awards and launch 
event, stresses desire 
for independence 
again to O’Grady.
“I’d also appreciate an opportunity to see what others 
plan to say at the launch. As you know, I’m very 
conscious of the fact that we’ll need to launch from a 
strong and independent footing in order to gain the 
credibility we’ll need to be effective in the sustainability 
space.” (JA) 
16-2-12 
12-89 
Arvai no longer 
Director of Centre in 
context of pressure 
from Enbridge, 
frustration from the 
HSB Dean, and 
misgivings from Arvai 
about what his 
directorship of ECCS 
has cost him 
academically and 
personally and may 
cost him in future.
16-3-12 
12-222 Kadatz suggests 
DuPont as 
replacement for 
Elizabeth Cannon at 
launch
“Bonnie DuPont is lined up to be Elizabeth Cannon’s back 
up. It was felt that as Board of Governor’s Vice-Chair and 
her connection to this investment that she would be a 
better fit for back up….” (KK)
17/18-3-
12 
12-
124/125 
Exchange between 
Arvai, Waverman and 
Kadatz about mention 
of CMU at launch. 
Waverman instructs 
Kadatz not reply to 
Arvai.
“We (HSB) are in agreement that we need to balance the 
positioning of the CMU partnership with other 
partnerships that are anticipated in the future… Each 
time we raise concerns about CMU with Enbridge, it 
raises for them a concern that we are not committed to 
our partnership with Enbridge. We are not in a position 
where we can tell Pat Daniel what he can or cannot say 
about CMU… The fact that Enbridge had a spill in 
Michigan and now wants to use this investment as a way 
to make amends and possibly receive some positive PR is 
acceptable.” (KK) 
“Kim, Please do not reply to Joseph. This from me. I 
appreciate what you are trying.” (LW) 
19-3-12 
12-129 Waverman writes to 
O’Grady, D’Arcy 
Levesque, and Glenn 
Herchak at Enbridge 
to let them know that 
Arvai has been 
removed as Director.
“Joe Arvai is no longer Director of the Centre, there are 
too many conflicts and demands! In the short term, we 
will have an academic Advisory Board, with Professor 
Loren Falkenberg, Associate Dean of Research at HSB… 
We are recruiting to replace Frances Bowen, that person 
will be earmarked to take over as Director/ Chair. Loren 
and I will represent the Centre at the launch and we will 
move ahead on all the exciting outreach and research….” 
(LW) 
20-3-12 
12-153 Kadatz reminds Loren 
Falkenberg and 
Waverman that
“as Glenn Herchak raised today, under the sponsorship 
agreement, ‘HSB will provide the opportunity for CMU to 
have a representative sit on the Advisory Board… I do
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
Enbridge would still 
like someone from 
CMU on Advisory 
Board.
not think that anyone from CMU has been asked to sit on 
the advisory at this point.” (KK)
20/22-3-
12 
12-
155/157 
Arvai becomes 
Advisory Board 
member. Enbridge has 
reservations.
“Len, my team advised me today that Joe will now be 
sitting on the external advisory board. I understand he 
would be part of the academic steering committee, but 
we have reservations about the external council?” (DL)
May-August 2012 
Key Events
 
Arvai, along with others, raises concerns about operations of the Centre and role of external 
Advisory Board. 
 
Arvai quits Advisory Board 
 
Cannon and Dru Marshall come down on Waverman for state of the Centre.
Observations Item # Event/document 
Relevant quotes 
5-6-12 
13-6/5/4 Arvai and others raise 
concerns about 
Advisory Board 
moving too fast and 
rushing research 
outputs. Falkenberg 
responds.
“I sense a bit of disagreement between the centre’s 
goals and those of the sponsor, especially if we adopt 
this notion – which we discussed – that we won’t be 
able to do everything in centre’s mandate at full speed 
in its first year. I also sense a mismatch between the 
interests of the sponsor in terms of the timing of 
certain outputs, mainly around research…” (JA) 
“All this means we had a good first meeting but there 
is more to do before the Centre enters the public 
arena as an entity taking action: despite Paul’s (PH) 
desire for quick action, the Centre’s Advisory Board 
will for sure lose me as a participant if we move before 
we collectively know what we’re doing.” (RG) 
“Apart from the split on the Board [between JA and 
others and PH, BD and others), I see some real 
governance issues.” (LF) 
27-7-12 
13-11 
Arvai resigns from 
Advisory Board.
30-7-12 
13-13 
Robin Gregory resigns 
from Advisory Board.
21/22/23-8-
12 
13-
17/16 
Cannon writes to 
Waverman to express 
concern about centre 
directorship. 
Dru Marshall 
responds. 
Waverman points to 
Arvai.
“The recruitment of a Director needs to be a very high 
priority and you need to lead this. Please send Dru 
[Marshall] and myself the detailed information for this 
(posting, process for recruitment, budget, timelines 
etc) so we know where this is and how it will managed 
and concluded successfully.” (EC) 
“The main issue is that at 225,000$ a year from 
Enbridge there is no money to hire a director… it was 
Joe Arvai whose interests and agenda don’t fit the 
Enbridge Centre….” (LW) 
“let’s chat about what needs to be done in order to 
make things work. We are at a critical point here – one 
that could result in reputational damage if we do not
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix B
manage this situation.” (DM) 
“This has been a problem from day 2 especially with 
Joe Arvai who has pi..ed off Enbridge big time…” (LW)
23-8-12 
13-
21/22 
Cannon writes to 
Waverman again with 
a stern warning re. 
his failure and the 
potential damage 
done to relationship 
with Enbridge. 
Cannon states that 
she wants to have a 
“good relationship 
with” Enbridge and 
that she is on one of 
their Boards. 
Waverman points to 
Enbridge’s desire for 
public relations and 
their public relations 
firm.
“Enbridge is not very happy… We need content and 
strategic leadership and that is what Enbridge is 
looking for… They have traditionally been strong 
supporters of U of A and this is the first major gift to U 
of C. This is also a legacy gift for Pat Daniel. They are 
looking for success and are not seeing it. I will be 
frank and add that they are not seeing your leadership 
on this file and are feeling that once the funding was 
committed, the interest from you was lost. This is not 
good for you or the university. I want to have a good 
relationship with Enbridge given that Al Monaco is 
incoming CEO and our grad (and I am on one of their 
Boards!). Our interest is well beyond HSB.” (EC) 
“It has been a set of unseen circumstances, but that is 
not an excuse, it is a reason for a leader to step up 
and take charge, I will, late but I will.” (LW) 
“Enbridge has been difficult – especially their PR firm 
who were trying to use events to buttress Enbridge’s 
name with little insight into the academic needs to be 
distant and to run the Centre as we see fit, that helped 
to drive Victoria Campbell Arvai away. I thought 
Enbridge was happy with Loren as interim?” (LW)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix C
Appendix C 
Policy Statement on Academic Freedom 
1 
Post-secondary educational institutions serve the common good of society through searching for, 
and disseminating, knowledge and understanding and through fostering independent thinking and 
expression in academic staff and students. Robust democracies require no less. These ends cannot 
be achieved without academic freedom. 
2 
Academic freedom includes the right, without restriction by prescribed doctrine, to freedom to 
teach and discuss; freedom to carry out research and disseminate and publish the results thereof; 
freedom to produce and perform creative works; freedom to engage in service to the institution 
and the community; freedom to express one’s opinion about the institution, its administration, and 
the system in which one works; freedom to acquire, preserve, and provide access to documentary 
material in all formats; and freedom to participate in professional and representative academic 
bodies. Academic freedom always entails freedom from institutional censorship. 
3 
Academic freedom does not require neutrality on the part of the individual. Academic freedom 
makes intellectual discourse, critique, and commitment possible. All academic staff must have the 
right to fulfil their functions without reprisal or repression by the institution, the state, or any other 
source. Contracts which are silent on the matter of academic freedom do not entitle the employer 
to breach or threaten in any way the academic freedom of academic staff employed under such 
collective agreements or other employment contracts. 
4 
All academic staff have the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion, expression, assembly, 
and association and the right to liberty and security of the person and freedom of movement. 
Academic staff must not be hindered or impeded in exercising their civil rights as individuals 
including the right to contribute to social change through free expression of opinion on matters of 
public interest. Academic staff must not suffer any institutional penalties because of the exercise of 
such rights. 
5 
Academic freedom requires that academic staff play a major role in the governance of the 
institution. Academic staff members shall constitute at least a majority on committees or collegial 
governing bodies responsible for academic matters including but not limited to curriculum, 
assessment procedures and standards, appointment, tenure and promotion. 
6 
Academic freedom must not be confused with institutional autonomy. Post-secondary institutions 
are autonomous to the extent that they can set policies independent of outside influence. That very 
autonomy can protect academic freedom from a hostile external environment, but it can also 
facilitate an internal assault on academic freedom. Academic freedom is a right of members of the 
academic staff, not of the institution. The employer shall not abridge academic freedom on any 
grounds, including claims of institutional autonomy.
Approved by the CAUT Council, November 2011.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix D
A
Appen
ndix D
D
November 4
4, 2011
Professor S
Association
600-350 Al
Ottawa, On
1B1
Stephen Too
pe Chair 
ties and Col
leges of Can
of Universit
bert Street 
ntario K1R
nada
Mr. Paul Da
Association
600-350 Al
Ottawa, On
1B1
avidson Pres
sident
of Universit
bert Street 
ntario K1R
ties and Col
leges of Can
nada
Dear Prof. T
Toope and M
Mr. Davidson
n:
We are writ
surprise an
ociation of U
eased “State
University Te
ement on Ac
eachers to e
cademic Free
a certain pe
advances th
years.
erverse iron
hat have be
y that AUCC
en achieved
C chose its 1
d in the unde
ttempt to un
c freedom ov
ndo many o
ver the past
In 1915, th
Principles o
statement o
that academ
key compon
Statement
ity Professor
ic Tenure” –
erica. One o
extramural u
rs adopted i
– the first an
its influentia
nd arguably 
ontributions
on of 
rtant 
nition 
een a
nd Academi
n North Ame
freedom of e
most impo
was recogn
This has be
c freedom in
m includes “f
of its key co
utterance an
t it finds no
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix D
Perhaps the majority of the famous academic freedom cases involve extramural speech, such as 
Bertrand Russell’s firing at Trinity College Cambridge and at City College of New York or the 
foundation academic freedom case in Canada – the firing of Harry Crowe at United College (now 
the University of Winnipeg).
Apparently, according to AUCC in 2011, extramural speech rights have no place in statements 
on academic freedom.
Another significant omission is that your 2011 statement makes no mention of academic freedom 
including the right to criticize the institution where one works – perhaps a not surprising 
omission from the organization representing the executive heads of Canada’s universities – but a 
troubling omission nonetheless. CAUT has long defined academic freedom as including the right 
“to express freely one’s opinion about the institution, its administration, or the system in which 
one works." This is a central aspect of academic freedom as it has been understood in Canada, 
and internationally as expressed in the 1997 UNESCO Recommendation Concerning the Status of 
Higher Education Teaching Personnel. It is also part of the great majority of academic freedom 
clauses in Canadian university collective agreements at the institutions whose presidents voted 
unanimously for a statement that does not mention this right.
AUCC’s new statement also fails to recognize that all three of academic staff responsibilities – 
teaching, research and service – come under the protection of academic freedom. Your statement 
fails to make reference to service, even though, most collective agreements have long recognized 
that academic freedom includes freedom to engage in service to the institution and the 
community.
Equally of concern is your statement’s conflation of academic freedom with institutional 
autonomy. It is absolutely true that academic institutions must not restrict the freedom of 
academic staff because of outside pressure – be it political, special interest group, religious – 
and institutions need to be autonomous in that sense. But to pretend that building a moat 
around the university protects academic freedom is disingenuous and ignores the reality of 
internal 
threats to academic freedom. The 1915 AAUP statement arose partially in recognition of internal 
threats – from boards, administration, colleagues and students. As the CAUT policy statement on 
academic freedom says, "Academic freedom must not be confused with institutional autonomy. 
Post-secondary institutions are autonomous to the extent that they can set policies independent of 
outside influence. That very autonomy can protect academic freedom from a hostile external 
environment, but it can also facilitate an internal assault on academic freedom. To undermine or 
suppress academic freedom is a serious abuse of institutional autonomy."
We are troubled that your 2011 statement introduces qualifications for academic freedom that 
open the door to its abuse:
"Academic freedom is constrained by the professional standards of the relevant discipline 
and the responsibility of the institution to organize its academic mission. The insistence 
on professional standards speaks to the rigor of the enquiry and not to its outcome.
The constraint of institutional requirements recognizes simply that the academic mission, 
like other work, has to be organized according to institutional needs. This includes the 
institution’s responsibility to select and appoint faculty and staff, to admit and discipline 
students, to establish and control curriculum, to make organizational arrangements for the 
conduct of academic work, to certify completion of a program and to grant degrees.”
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix D
AUCC is correct that academic freedom is a professional right but your statement fails to 
acknowledge any of the nuance that is now commonplace. “Profession” is both the basis for 
academic freedom but can be a source of its abuse. Hence the need to understand “professional 
standards” as heuristic devices that themselves are always contested. None of this subtlety 
appears in the AUCC statement, leaving a rigid notion of “professional standards of the relevant 
discipline” that could countenance repression of academic freedom for ideas at the margin or 
ideas that are critical of the mainstream.
As well this section gives incredible power to the “constraint of institutional requirements” 
without once affirming them as collegially determined rather than administratively handed down. 
This is especially disturbing as your 1988 statement is careful to note that any parameters that 
guide the exercise of academic freedom must be developed internally, and collectively. It also 
acknowledges that institutional decisions rely upon a collective engagement with the intellectual 
enterprise by the practitioners of that enterprise. This nuance is lost in the 2011 statement, 
which omits reference to the collective project.
In light of the above, we are concerned about the AUCC claim in the 2011 [not present in your 
1988 statement] that “The university must also defend academic freedom against interpretations 
that are excessive or too loose.” By whose definition of “excessive” or “too loose?”
Your 2011 statement’s qualification of academic freedom continues: “Universities must also 
ensure that the rights and freedoms of others are respected, and that academic freedom is 
exercised in a reasonable and responsible manner.” The administration’s notion of “reasonable 
and responsible” exercise of academic freedom has been at the base of some very serious 
violations of academic freedom for decades upon decades. The examples are numerous.
We also see danger in what might be intended as innocuous language in your statement: “Faculty 
have an equal responsibility to submit their knowledge and claims to rigorous and public review 
by peers who are experts in the subject matter under consideration and to ground their 
arguments in the best available evidence.” However innocuous the intention, the effect can be 
chilling. Do you mean that if peers view one’s work negatively, one no longer has the academic 
freedom to pursue the idea? Some ideas are beyond the bound of any serious scientific basis – 
that the world is flat or that humans were created 6,000 years ago. But many other scientific 
ideas were broadly panned but proven right (e.g. the bacterial basis of ulcers). And what of 
Harvard’s president, during the cold war years, saying that no communist could teach at Harvard 
because they could not, by definition, be independent thinkers? We could go on and on with 
examples. There is a grain of truth to the importance of peer review and the professional basis of 
academic freedom, but your statement’s crude description opens the door widely to the kind of 
abuse we have seen for a hundred years.
On the positive side, we are pleased with the statement’s affirmation: "Academic freedom does 
not exist for its own sake, but rather for important social purposes. Academic freedom is 
essential to the role of universities in a democratic society. Universities are committed to the 
pursuit of truth and its communication to others, including students and the broader community. 
To do this, faculty must be free to take intellectual risks and tackle controversial subjects in their 
teaching, research and scholarship." We also welcome the statement’s reference to the 
importance of academic integrity.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix D
Overall, though, the statement, as we said at the outset, would reverse 100 years of 
advancement in the understanding of academic freedom. With the growing pressures on 
universities to compromise their defense of academic freedom in the quest for financial support, 
we need a more expansive notion of academic freedom, not a more restrictive one. A major 
problem in Canadian universities is not that too many people are asserting their academic 
freedom, but that too few are. AUCC’s rendition of academic freedom will only worsen this 
problem. 
We would be pleased to discuss this matter further with you, should you wish.
Yours truly,
Wayne D. Peters 
James L. Turk 
President 
Executive Director
/mmp
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix E
Appendix E 
Message of March 18, 2016, from U of C Provost Dru Marshall to U of C staff 
A message from Dru Marshall, Provost and Vice-President (Academic) to all academic staff and 
senior leadership team members 
As you may be aware, the (CAUT) has established an Ad-Hoc Investigatory Committee to look into 
alleged violations of academic freedom and conflict of interest surrounding the former Enbridge 
Centre for Corporate Sustainability, and to consider other issues related to conflict of interest, 
governance, academic freedom and the management of donations at the University of Calgary. 
We have been informed that Committee members are planning to visit the university on April 18 
and 19. As some members of our academic staff will likely be contacted by the Committee for 
information and interviews, I am writing to provide some information on this matter. 
CAUT is an external body that has no official standing on our campus, and is not bound by our 
policies, including those that protect privacy and confidentiality. In particular, CAUT does not have 
standing to investigate the matters set out in the Ad-Hoc Investigatory Committee’s terms of 
reference. The Committee’s terms of reference can be found here: 
If you are contacted by members of the CAUT Committee, you are under no obligation to 
participate in their investigation. Those of you who choose to participate have the right to express 
your opinions, and your freedom to do so will be respected. You are reminded that your privacy 
may not be protected by CAUT, and if you provide sensitive or confidential information to CAUT, 
that confidentiality may not be protected. 
Last fall the university’s Board of Governors initiated a comprehensive and independent review of 
matters relating to the creation and operation of the former Enbridge Centre for Corporate 
Sustainability. The review was conducted by the eminently qualified Retired 
Justice Terrence McMahon, Q.C. McMahon’s report was released publicly on December 18, 2015 
and found that there were no breaches of university policies or procedures, no conflict of interest 
relating to President Cannon, and no improper conduct by anyone involved in the creation and 
operation of the Centre. The report also unequivocally concluded that President Cannon’s actions 
were proper, responsible, and required of her as president. Following the release of the report, 
Gordon Ritchie, Vice-Chair of the Board of Governors, speaking on behalf of the Board, said: 
“President Cannon is a person of character, with the highest standards of ethics and integrity, and 
enjoys the full support and confidence of the governors of the University of Calgary.” To read the 
report go to: 
If you have questions or concerns about privacy and confidentiality, please contact 
Best, 
Dru Marshall 
Provost and Vice-President (Academic)
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix F
Appendix F 
Response of the Investigatory Committee to the Message of March 18, 2016, from 
Provost Dru Marshall to U of C staff 
We are the members of the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) ad hoc 
investigatory committee of inquiry into the Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability. Our 
committee is visiting the University on April 18 to 19 to afford an opportunity for colleagues, 
students, and other members of the University of Calgary community to meet with us. 
We write to clarify some information about our inquiry following a recent email to the University 
community from Provost Dr. Dru Marshall. 
Origins of the inquiry 
Our committee was established by the CAUT, a national organization representing about 68,000 
members of academic staff associations in Canada. Our mandate in general is to investigate 
alleged conflicts of interest, violations of academic freedom, and external interference surrounding 
the establishment of the Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability at the University and to make 
appropriate recommendations. The full mandate is available here: 
Our role in the inquiry 
We are independent academics from other Canadian universities who have relevant experience and 
expertise and we serve voluntarily on the committee as part of our academic service. Through this 
service, we hope to contribute to the academic health of publicly funded universities and to the 
corresponding rights of faculty, students, and staff. As CAUT investigators, we are governed by 
seven publicly available policies of the CAUT and will refer to those policies to determine whether 
an institution’s policies are acceptable and whether they are being adhered to in ways consistent 
with academic freedom and academic integrity. You can read them here: ( 
policy) 
Privacy and confidentiality 
In carrying out our work, we will be diligent in protecting the privacy and confidentiality of those 
who communicate with us, as they prefer, in accordance with the customary practice at the CAUT. 
The CAUT has conducted numerous investigations into alleged breaches of academic freedom and 
adheres to stringent procedures regarding the privacy and confidentiality of those who chose to 
speak with us alone or accompanied by a colleague or advisor. These procedures will be followed in 
any information gathering we do at the University of Calgary. You can read the current policy here: 
(CAUT Procedures in Academic Freedom Cases))
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix F
The report by Retired Justice Terrence McMahon 
In her email to the University community about our visit, Dr. Marshall referred to the report of 
Retired Justice Terrence McMahon. We do not wish to comment on that report at this time, other 
than to say that we will be pursuing our investigation as mandated by the CAUT and that the origin 
and content of our mandate differs significantly from that of Retired Justice McMahon. 
Our invitation to President Elizabeth Cannon 
We have written previously to President Elizabeth Cannon, requesting to meet with University 
officials and staff in order to achieve a full and fair determination of the facts. We hope that the 
President will respond in a positive manner and welcome the opportunity that our committee offers 
for the University to demonstrate its commitment to the highest standards for its faculty, staff and 
administrators. 
Our openness to meet with members of the University community 
As our schedule allows, our committee will meet with interested parties on campus or elsewhere in 
Calgary, by telephone or other means, and on or off the record, as requested. We are committed to 
carrying out a fair and thorough investigation with careful attention to relevant facts, to the 
academic integrity of a public university, and to the academic values and interests of faculty, 
students, and staff. 
Please contact me via email at or by phone at 306-934-1040 if you wish to 
speak with the members of our committee. 
Len Findlay, Chair, CAUT Ad-Hoc Investigative Committee, for: 
L. M. Findlay, Distinguished University Professor, University of Saskatchewan 
Alison Hearn, Associate Professor, Western University 
Gus Van Harten, Associate Professor, Osgoode Hall Law School, York University
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
A
Appen
ndix G
G
Gordon M.
, Board of Go
. Ritchie 
overnors
Chair,
Building, 
Drive NW
A
A165 250
Administration
00 University D
Calgary, AB,
, Canada
A
C
2
O
A
D
R
T
c
F
T
E
D
A
i
T
M
w
e
T
m
o
t
p
C
Tel: (403) 2
Fax: (403) 2
Canadian As
2705 Queen
Ottawa, Ont
ssociation of
nsview Drive
f University 
e
Teachers
tario, K2B 8
K2
David Rob
cutive Dire
Attention:
ector
inson, Exe
Dear Sir:
Re: CAUT A
Ad Hoc Inv
estigatory
Committe
e
The Univers
concerning 
Findlay, Alis
ary has been
gation being
n made awa
g conducted
are of a num
d on your
e “Ad Hoc In
rch 20, 201
n’s behalf 
y Committee
17 letters fr
by Professo
e”).
an investig
on Hearn an
This letter w
Elizabeth Ca
Developmen
will serve a
annon, Past
nt Kim Kada
as the resp
t Board of
ty and of P
nie DuPont,
aware, the
t and comp
cMahon, Q.C
atter of yo
review initia
cted former
duct by the
ur investiga
ated by the
ation has a
e Board of
ndependent
Terrence Mc
McMahon fo
with Enbridg
encroachme
Justice of t
university o
f the involv
demic freed
the Alberta
or any of its
und “no imp
ge, and co
ent upon or
” in its relat
... resulted
at “none of
e of the aca
vement by
dom of the U
The report a
media about
of the alleg
that Dr. Can
proper, resp
Calgary as a
also addres
t the condu
sed the ser
ct of Presid
uding confli
lvement in
rious allegat
tions that h
th Cannon.
est concerns
had been m
made publicl
y and throu
rough in his
clude unequ
nbridge Cen
ugh the 
s review 
uivocally
ent Elizabet
ict of intere
Mr. McMaho
s, and state
on was thor
ed: “I conc
on of the En
ations, inclu
nnon’s invol
ponsible, an
an institution
matters ari
of her as Pr
sing from t
resident to p
he operatio
protect the
tre was 
ersity of
d required o
n that hono
reputation o
of the Unive
urs its comm
mitment to
donors.”
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Given the CAUT Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee’s obligation of independence, and its mandate to 
conduct a full and fair review, it would be expected that the Committee would have regard to Mr. 
McMahon’s findings as responsive to the matters raised in your various letters. 
The University and those individuals referenced above to whom you have sent letters are very 
concerned that the Investigatory Committee has not conducted itself with the independence and 
fairness mandated by your CAUT Procedures in Academic Freedom Cases, and as a result any 
report the Committee issues will lack legitimacy. 
For example, the following statements appear in a presentation made by the Committee’s Chair to 
a National Conference on University Governance in the 21st Century hosted by the Confederation 
of University Faculty Associations of BC (“CUFA BC”) on March 4, 2017:
Institutional Autonomy and Academic Freedom [Slide 4]
… 
► Which will it be? CAUT or UC? 
Contingencies of Progress [Slide 18]
… 
► Here, I would simply reference CAUT’s invaluable but disregarded Open 
for Business On what terms? (2013), and also my experience investigating 
(with two colleagues), for the past year and a half, the Enbridge Centre for 
Corporate Sustainability at the University of Calgary
► My personal view (without precedent or prejudice!) of the PUBLIC record in the 
Calgary case is DAMNING 
My takeaways from the ECCS at the University of Calgary [Slide 19]
► It is worse than we thought 
► Institutional leadership can be fraudulent and imperious
► The collegium can be both spineless and merely careerist 
► CAUT’s fight with heteronomy means it is reviled and feared by pseudo- 
autonomists 
The presentation was not merely made in a public forum, but the slides have continued to be 
publicly available on the CUFA BC website. In addition, the University has been advised that Slide 
19 “My takeaways” in particular has been circulated through social media. 
The statements in the presentation clearly give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias and pre-
judging, made as they were even before you sent your letters asking for responses to findings 
that the Investigatory Committee had under consideration. Such a flawed process is unacceptable 
for any credible investigation. It certainly does not conform to a process which would be expected 
of an investigation conducted by any university.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
A
i
p
T
v
m
Y
A body with
“fully and fa
a mandate
irly” does n
n. It does 
o make ad
e to conduct
t an investig
gation that i
uation as so
is “independ
dent” and is
s to review 
h the subjec
matters 
ct of the 
whom it 
nces as
ot characte
not feign f
dverse find
rize the situ
fairness by
me sort of c
contest with
nvestigation
proposes to
“DAMNING”,
That the CA
view that it 
matters.
responses
icly condem
ulent and im
from those
mning the 
mperious”.
e against w
asking for
after publi
s as “fraudu
, and charac
AUT Ad Hoc
ory Commit
ort which st
ttee has se
tands as th
en fit to do
he proper a
Yours truly,
G
C
c
GORDON M.
Chair, Board
RITCHIE, 
d of Governo
ors
cc. Professo
rs Len Findl
ay, Alison H
Hearn and G
Gus Van Har
rten
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
OSGOODE HAL
LAW SCHOOL 
4700 Keele St. 
Toronto ON 
Canada M3J 1P3
Tel 416 736 503
Fax 416 736 573
LL
3 
0 
36 
orku.ca
May 1, 20
Gordon M
Chair, Boa
University
Administra
2500 Univ
Calgary, A
By
(Board Go
Dear Mr. R
Thank you
University
Kadatz, in
University
draft repo
Centre for
present le
and myse
investigat
York Unive
understan
or about M
. Ritchie 
ard of Gove
y of Calgary
rnors
ative Buildin
versity Drive
AB T2N 1N4
ng, A165 
e NW
allalba@uca
Coordinator
miranda.da
overnance C
lgary.ca
Miranda Da
llalba)
Ritchie,
l 18, 2017,
Cannon, Bo
on behalf o
nnie DuPon
dian Associa
u for your le
y of Calgary,
n reply to let
y Teachers (
ort of the CA
etter of Apri
of the
, Elizabeth C
tters sent by
(CAUT) outli
AUT investig
t, and Kim 
ation of
y the Canad
ining the pre
gatory comm
eliminary fin
mittee into t
ndings of th
the Enbridge
sponse. The
he
e 
e
r Corporate
etter reflects
Sustainabil
s the views
ademic capa
ity and aski
ing for a res
e Professor 
mbers of the
of Associate
acity as mem
Alison Hear
e
rn
lf in our aca
ory commit
ersity, or th
nd that the C
tee and not
he University
t those of Os
sgoode Hall
n Ontario. W
you replied w
Law Schoo
We
ol,
y of Wester
s to which y
n
CAUT letters
were sent o
March 20, 2
017.
tter, you ra
ise concern
t of Professo
In your le
judgment 
investigat
presentati
with matt
and any a
given with
the comm
presentati
language 
provided t
Professor 
personal c
objective
s about app
or Len Findl
You refer to
prehended b
bias and pre
e-
on the part
ory commit
ion given by
ers relating
associated p
ay in his rol
le as
tee chair. Y
y Professor
a publicly a
March 4, 20
andate. The
vailable 
017, dealing
presentatio
dlay were
Findlay on M
mittee’s ma
ments by Pro
on
to the com
ublic statem
owledge and
uage used b
ofessor Find
flect our vie
hout our kno
mittee. Langu
d do not ref
by Professor
ws or those
e of
r Findlay in 
does not ref
his 
flect the
ion and repr
roduced in y
mittee’s draf
your letter d
in the comm
to you and t
ft report or
n whose beh
the prelimin
half you hav
nary finding
ve written.
gs
to others on
ted in his pr
d we think it
n a
Findlay stat
capacity and
resentation
that he was
e to expect 
resentation i
s speaking i
t reasonable
stand the pr
that an 
in that light
observer wo
ould unders
t.
Nonethele
Findlay to
investigat
reflected b
objective 
complete.
about the
r
ess, it was a
an unfortuna
ate lapse of
judgment f
subject mat
ompleted. O
for Professo
have expre
ion before t
by our pract
essed his vie
the process
ews on the
tter of the 
Our view,
was fully co
committee
nclusions un
tice, is that
ach their con
members m
ntil the proc
must remain
n
and not rea
 Further, co
ess is 
k publicly 
he process is
ommittee m
embers mu
and conclusi
st not spea
ions until th
committee’
’s findings a
s
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
if at all. Wh
statements
dging, we ac
hile we take
e no position
n on whethe
ble apprehen
reated a bas
ee. Out of re
n, we have a
er Professor
r
complete,
Findlay’s s
or pre-jud
on your pa
concern a
Professor 
agreed to
give rise to
ccept that th
a reasonab
hey have cr
he committe
nsion of bias
sis for doubt
espect for th
s 
t 
his
art about hi
is role on th
n abundance
step down fr
nd out of an
e of caution
rom the com
asked 
d he has
Findlay to s
mmittee and
do so.
As an asid
Findlay’s 
Canada no
As the com
we have, 
committee
others by 
preliminar
reply to th
provide us
give our a
in good fa
committee
Findlay to
In your le
review an
have rega
regard to 
To reitera
whose beh
committed
before we
and Tenur
Teachers.
your inform
n is that th
niversity of C
presentatio
ot to the Un
Calgary.
embers are
ofessor Find
s that were c
emaining m
ntly from Pro
w as its co-
ed the 
ted to you a
r unanimous
communica
y reflect our
ess a furthe
the CAUT a
ry view. We
he substanc
ed that they
you in fairne
mmittee’s p
mation within
also offer y
ce of the com
r opportunit
findings and
of this letter
ty to 
d/ or
reliminary f
n 15 days o
y further rep
s with addit
assurance th
aith and, in a
ional inform
hat we will c
. We 
re and
consider any
ply with car
wing the
any event, w
port in its en
we commit
ntirety and i
nt reflects o
to re-review
independen
our unanimo
e’s draft rep
tly from Pro
ous view.
ofessor
confirm tha
at its conten
to the McM
mmittee wo
tter of April
d state that
ard to that r
18, you als
t it would be
so raise issu
e expected t
wish to infor
ues relating
ahon 
uld 
ad
that our com
rm you that
w in our dra
eview. We w
ith the McM
t we have h
and deal wi
ahon review
ft report.
ome any fu
ve addresse
ering your p
te, we welc
half you hav
d to conside
e finalize our
rther reply f
ed the comm
position fairly
from you or
mittee within
r anyone els
n 15 days. W
an open min
demic Freed
r report for
ee of the Ca
to the Acad
ociation of U
Yours trul
y,
Professor, F
y of Western
Faculty of In
n Ontario
Gus Van H
Professor,
cc: Elizabe
Harten,
, Osgoode H
Hall Law Sch
hool of York
University
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Gordon M.
Board of Gov
Ritchie 
vernors
Chair,
Building,
Ad
A165
dministration B
2500 Universit
ty Drive
NW 
Canada 
T2N 1N4
Calgary, AB,
T
ucalgary.ca/sec
M
V
C
2
O
A
D
R
T
y
M
Y
s
I
H
p
e
p
C
y
v
o
t
C
f
P
b
T
a
w
u
Ema
cretariat
lgary.ca 
220-7212 
284-5245
ail: chair@uca
Tel: (403) 2
Fax: (403) 2
May 23, 201
Canadian As
2705 Queen
Ottawa, Ont
ssociation of
nsview Drive
f University 
e
Teachers
tario, K2B 8
K2
Dear Profess
sors Van Ha
arten and He
earn:
Committe
Re: CAUT A
Ad Hoc Inv
estigatory
e
Thank you f
your Ad Hoc
March 20, 2
ter of May 
tory Commi
1, 2017, ad
ittee, and i
of Professo
sponse to t
017.
You indicate
slide presen
Investigator
e that you r
ntation, and
ry Committe
respect the 
d that as a
ee.
concerns w
a result you
which result
t from Profe
rofessor Fin
essor Findla
ndlay to ste
ay’s March 4
4, 2017 
rom the
u asked Pr
ep down fr
However, re
pre-judgmen
especially w
preliminary 
Chair of the
your letter t
views. The p
of the Inves
the Committ
e member o
prehended b
of the three
bias does li
rms that th
ached in co
vestigatory 
y our conc
g Committe
with Profess
versity does 
disregarded
nt and app
when your l
ttle to allay
e remaining
nsultation w
n, the Univ
on can be d
etter confir
ch were rea
when he w
t the sugge
stion in 
personal 
he Chair 
views of
or Findlay’s
n made by P
ommittee w
as reflectin
igation whil
vers as refle
g only his p
e he was th
ecting the v
presentation
stigatory Co
Professor Fi
ndlay about
en by objec
t the investi
ctive observ
ould be see
tee.
Consequent
failure of th
Procedures i
by the rema
ly, the Univ
he Committe
not believe 
ly with the 
Cases. The U
ocess outlin
nce and fai
letter remed
dated by th
ersity does 
ee to comp
c Freedom C
bers of the C
The Univers
across the c
would be fu
s as well th
icipated in t
of the CAU
eadership fr
nce and had
res in Acad
rom CAUT a
d access to t
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
u
o
r
c
I
C
c
r
it
r
a
Y
university p
of April 18,
remedying t
complicit the
or fair and 
CAUT that a
not until m
n falls far s
2017 to C
the process
erein.
and even 
cess to con
It remains t
Corporate S
conduct by t
resulted in a
ty’s view th
y is the Mc
ity or any o
chment upo
. Cannon’s
per and legi
port, which
cMahon Rep
of its employ
on or compr
was “no im
ent by Enbr
of the Unive
concluded 
“none of th
he academic
yees”, that 
romise of th
ts staff”, a
responsible,
as an institu
conduct in 
s President t
with the E
he reputatio
Enbridge Ce
on of the Un
and require
ution that ho
ed of her as
onours its co
Yours truly,
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
OSGOODE HAL
LAW SCHOOL 
4700 Keele St. 
Toronto ON 
Canada M3J 1P3
Tel 416 736 503
Fax 416 736 573
LL
August 1, 
Gordon M
Chair, Boa
University
Administra
2500 Univ
Calgary, A
By
(Board Go
Dear Mr. R
Thank you
you raised
and Tenur
Additional
Your addit
that we ar
we consul
preliminar
administra
objectively
On the firs
individuals
of senior a
remained 
conclusion
of what m
Corporate
academics
academics
on, and to
forefront o
In light of
last month
conductin
report in i
On your s
conveyed 
they were
from the i
findings w
provide a
. Ritchie 
ard of Gove
y of Calgary
rnors
ative Buildin
versity Drive
AB T2N 1N4
ng, A165 
e NW
allalba@uca
Coordinator
miranda.da
overnance C
lgary.ca
Miranda Da
llalba)
u for your le
d before fina
We conside
e CAUT’s Ac
red the issu
cademic Free
alizing our r
ee, and offe
report to the
er you a deta
edom
re Committe
ailed reply b
below.
l process-re
lated conce
erns about th
he investiga
ation
tional conce
re tainted a
erns about t
he process
of our inqui
estigatory Co
iry are esse
ommittee be
ment on
ntially 
ecause
s members 
ofessor Find
previously c
Professor Fin
ble to us.
of the Inve
dlay, we wer
conveyed in
ted with Pro
ry findings p
ators, and P
to senior U 
ut the inqui
st point, ove
s and sough
administrato
er the cours
ht to hear al
se of the inq
quiry we spo
perspectives
oke to many
s including t
y 
those
ll relevant p
ors. Like an
throughout o
y objectivel
of our duty
y minded a
cademic, we
ndings and r
e 
reach 
eptions 
or
conscious t
ns based on
may have tak
to make fin
s and not an
the eviden
ken place in
ce before us
n relation to
ny preconce
ge Centre fo
the Enbridg
t responsibi
ws independ
rnments, th
sibility was a
Findlay or an
our highest
our own view
lities as 
dently of oth
s is to form 
s, University
o keep an op
and state o
y administra
e courts, an
always at th
nyone else.
blic stateme
ps to ensure
w of all of the
e evidence 
cations as a
and of our d
a result.
making sev
veral modific
ts entirety,
es of prelimi
nistrators we
to senior U
e always ope
of C admin
en to recons
nary”, mean
sponses, if a
ased on res
preliminary v
ndividuals i
were formed
n question.
 with a view
cope of noti
views of pot
sive in order
tential 
r to
Also, our p
w to being o
overly inclus
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
that the provision of the notices, in confidence, was itself a marker of 
our and the CAUT’s commitment to fairness and thoroughness in the 
investigation. 
On your third point, Professor Findlay communicated at the time he 
made his public statements that he was speaking in a personal capacity. 
We clarified at a very early opportunity that we were unaware of his 
intent to make the statements and that they did not reflect our views or 
those of the committee. We have done the same in our report. In the 
circumstances, we find it hard to see how an objective observer, 
apprised of the relevant information, would find any reasonable basis to 
attribute Professor Findlay’s public statements to us. We take guidance 
in these respects from the relevant tests for reasonably apprehended 
bias of administrative decision-makers as laid out in Supreme Court of 
Canada decisions such as National Energy Board, [1978] 1 SCR 369, 
and Newfoundland Telephone, [1992] 1 SCR 623. With that reference 
point, we think that your claim that Professor Findlay’s public 
statements gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias on his part is 
arguable, but that your evident attempt to extend the claim to 
ourselves, in circumstances where we did not make, authorize, or 
otherwise identify ourselves with the statements, is far-fetched. 
We note that you have not expressly alleged any actual or apparent bias 
on our part, asserting instead that our report will “lack legitimacy”. We 
suggest that the question of legitimacy of our report should be left to 
those who read it. 
Erroneous statement about Professor Findlay 
You state erroneously in your letter that Professor Findlay was removed 
from our committee. On the contrary, Professor Findlay accepted our 
concern that it was a lapse of judgment for him to have made public 
statements about the inquiry before the process was completed and 
without our knowledge, and resigned voluntarily and with grace. In this 
respect, he provides a good example of how one can take responsibility 
for a mistake, out of a sense of fairness to others. 
In light of your mischaracterization of Professor Findlay’s resignation, we 
highlight that he has shown more accountability for his mistake than 
members of your Board and senior U of C administrators have shown for 
their own more serious mistakes, including the failure to address a clear 
appearance of conflict of interest, as we discuss further in our report. 
Unwillingness to participate constructively in the investigation 
We undertook this inquiry in good faith as an academic service, with a 
view to examining what happened at the Enbridge Centre and to making 
constructive recommendations to assist the University of Calgary, other 
universities, our fellow academics, and the public. From the start, we 
sought to hear and learn from the perspectives of senior U of C 
administrators. They declined to meet with us or to communicate with
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
us on any matter of substance related to what took place at the 
Enbridge Centre. Their participation has instead been limited to raising 
process- related concerns and taking active steps, in effect, to frustrate 
or discredit the inquiry. 
In particular, the U of C senior leadership took these steps with respect 
to the present independent inquiry. 
 
After the U of C Administration was informed of our visit to the 
University campus and interest to meet with senior administrators, 
Provost Dru Marshall wrote to all U of C academic staff with 
misleading information about CAUT policies on privacy and 
confidentiality. We think it reasonable for U of C staff to have 
interpreted that communication as an implied warning not to 
communicate with the inquiry. 
 
After senior U of C administrators were given notice, in fairness, of 
potentially negative findings against them, you raised allegations of 
bias against Professor Findlay. Before we had an opportunity to 
consider and respond to your concerns, you made your letter public 
in an apparent effort to discredit the inquiry. 
 
After we informed you of our response to your concerns about the 
inquiry’s process, including significant steps to address your 
concerns, you raised more process-related concerns directed at 
ourselves. Once again, before giving us an opportunity to respond, 
you made public both our response to your earlier concerns and your 
letter laying out additional concerns, in an apparent effort to 
discredit the inquiry. 
Thus, the senior U of C leadership took active steps to frustrate the only 
formal investigation of the Enbridge Centre that was not established by 
the University itself. We suggest that this approach contradicts your 
professed commitment to undergo a transparent and independent 
review of the Enbridge Centre. 
Your reliance on the McMahon review 
Former Justice Terrence McMahon was hired by the U of C Board to 
investigate the conduct of U of C administrators in relation to the 
Enbridge Centre. We respect Mr. McMahon’s work and think it 
appropriate to have more than one review of these matters. Among 
other things, the two reviews will allow for a comparison of approaches 
taken by academic investigators, on the one hand, and a former judge 
and practising lawyer, on the other. 
As you have relied repeatedly on the McMahon review to excuse conduct 
of senior U of C administrators, however, we think it pertinent to highlight 
findings from our own review of the McMahon report based on the record 
before us. 
They are as follows:
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
1. It was misleading for the Board that you chair to characterize the 
McMahon review as “independent” of the University of Calgary, 
considering that the McMahon review was established, mandated, and 
staffed by the Board, a Board committee, or the Board’s counsel. 
2. The McMahon review and resulting report did not include an 
acknowledgment and discussion of the central role of academic freedom 
at universities, at the University of Calgary, or in relation to concerns 
expressed about the Enbridge Centre. The evident lack of appreciation 
of the central role of academic freedom appears to us to have affected 
and limited in a significant way the findings and conclusions of the 
McMahon review. 
3. Conclusions reached in the McMahon report, in light of the available 
factual information, appear repeatedly to have given the benefit of the 
doubt to senior University officials. In contrast, two named individuals, 
Professors Joe Arvai and Leonard Waverman, appear not to have 
received a similar benefit of the doubt but were instead the subject of 
damaging criticism in the report. 
4. The McMahon review process was premised on non-disclosure of 
sources of information that was potentially adverse to individuals who 
had raised concerns about or were otherwise involved in the Enbridge 
Centre. Yet former Justice McMahon went on to identify and draw 
negative conclusions about such individuals. We think that this process, 
especially its selective approach to confidentiality, was inconsistent with 
principles of fairness and thoroughness. Based on our review of the 
available information and the McMahon report, we think that the 
negative conclusions or comments by former Justice McMahon – about 
Joe Arvai, Leonard Waverman, and unnamed but identifiable 
organizations and individuals who had criticized the University – should 
be disregarded. 
We wish to emphasize one additional point. 
Between us, we have extensive experience dealing with University 
administrations on matters related to academic freedom and, more 
broadly, working on public inquiries into scandalous or tragic events. 
Neither of us can recall ever having encountered a University 
administration, or indeed any party, that took such an array of steps as 
the University of Calgary has done in order to avoid engaging with, while 
also actively frustrating or discrediting, an independent investigation into 
its past conduct.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
We sugge
engage w
assessme
Enbridge s
hope that 
express o
doing goo
circumsta
In light of
your webs
in this way
of Calgary
est that the
present inqu
de body and
Administratio
p. We regret
uiry was a m
d allow for a
missed oppo
an independ
ortunity for 
dent academ
with respect
you to 
mic
ith an outsid
nt of your A
sponsorship
on’s decisio
t that this o
ead our rep
e faculty, sta
hat appear t
n-making w
pportunity w
ort with an 
aff, and stu
to be challen
to the 
and 
 We 
are
was missed
you will no
ur support f
od academic
netheless re
for all of the
open mind.
dents who a
nging
work in wh
U of C.
nces at the
f your past p
practice, we
e request th
er letters be
at you publ
tween us th
o members
ish this lette
hat you pub
er on
site, alongsi
de the othe
he letter is a
lished 
versity
y, so that th
y community
accessible to
of the Univ
y and the pu
ublic.
Yours trul
y,
Professor, F
y of Western
Faculty of In
n Ontario
Gus Van H
Professor,
cc: David
Harten,
, Osgoode H
Hall Law Sch
hool of York
University
irector, CAU
Robinson, E
Executive D
UT
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Gordon M.
, Board of Go
. Ritchie
vernors
Chair,
Building, 
Drive NW
A
A165 250
Administration
00 University D
Calgary, AB,
, Canada
T
ucalgary.ca/se
mail: chair@uca
T2N 1N4 
ecretariat
Em
algary.ca
A
V
C
2
O
A
D
R
T
p
C
W
W
r
o
it
u
s
p
Y
r
f
u
t
Y
w
M
a
20-7212 
84-5245
Tel: (403) 2
Fax: (403) 2
August 15, 2
2017
Canadian As
2705 Queen
Ottawa, Ont
ssociation of
nsview Drive
f University 
e
Teachers
tario, K2B 8
K2
Dear Profess
sors Van Ha
arten and He
earn:
Committe
Re: CAUT A
Ad Hoc Inv
estigatory
e
Thank you f
public statem
Committee.
for your Au
ments in a M
ugust 1 lette
er respondi
ng to our c
ation while h
concerns ar
he was chai
rising from
Professor F
d Hoc Invest
Findlay’s
March 4, 20
17 presenta
r of your Ad
tigatory
We do not a
gree with m
many aspect
ts of your le
tter.
We disagree
rise to a rea
observers w
suggestion
pprehension
der our conc
n that our c
n of bias wa
concern abo
as merely a
obvious, not
statements
hink that o
u then sugge
one. We th
guable. You
bjective 
est that 
uld have 
ht of his
t is far-fetch
upon you as
statements 
presumably
hed for any
s the remai
one to be c
ning memb
sor Findlay’
cknowledge 
which you
Yet you ac
port with w
that in ligh
initially con
modify th
cate the imp
e draft rep
pact of his in
ncurred,
you have 
in an attem
decided to 
mpt to eradic
nvolvement
t.
f bias as “l
er process is
vestigation
You charact
related conc
fairness in 
university. I
the legitima
terize our c
cerns”. We a
ed about pr
 is certainl
about a rea
use a prope
d of an inv
You criticize
was remove
May 1 - tha
agreed to do
my May 23
ed from you
3, 2017 lette
r Committe
ining the er
r simply not
dlay to step
e. My letter
ofessor Find
ted what wa
p down from
as stated in
m the Comm
your own l
mittee and
at you had 
o so.” Our re
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Your letter goes on to criticize the University’s response to your inquiry and the report of former 
Justice Terrence McMahon. 
You refer to the University “taking active steps, in effect, to frustrate or discredit the inquiry.” You 
cite three things in support of this charge – an email from Provost Dru Marshall about your 
Committee’s visit to the University, my initial letter in response to your request for comments on 
adverse findings in your draft report, and my further letter explaining that Professor Findlay’s 
removal from the Committee did not resolve our concerns about a reasonable apprehension of 
bias. 
We do not accept your interpretation and criticism of Dr. Marshall’s email and the posting of our 
responses to your March 20 and May 1 letters on our website before you could respond to them. It 
was important to keep the University community informed in a timely manner of developments 
with respect to the investigation, having regard to the fact that CAUT made a public 
announcement concerning the investigation in November 2015, and in light of Professor Findlay’s 
public statements in his March 4, 2017 presentation while he was chair of the Investigatory 
Committee. 
We note that Dr. Marshall’s email expressly advised faculty members that while they were under 
no obligation to participate in the investigation, “Those of you who choose to participate have the 
right to express your opinions, and your freedom to do so will be respected.” If anyone 
interpreted the email as some sort of warning against communicating with your Committee, that 
was clearly not intended. 
Your letter goes on to state that you respect the work of former Justice Terrence McMahon, but 
then level a number of significant criticisms of it with which we take issue:
You accuse the University of being misleading in characterizing Mr. McMahon’s review as 
independent, because it was “established, mandated and staffed by the Board, a Board 
committee or the Board’s counsel.” We do not understand the basis for your suggestion 
that Mr. McMahon’s investigation was staffed by anyone other than himself, and we do 
not think any objective observer would consider that he lacked independence. Boards of 
Directors regularly establish independent committees and investigatory bodies, and their 
findings are not disregarded as lacking independence on this account. The terms of 
reference granted Mr. McMahon “unfettered discretion to gather information through 
documents or personal interviews.” As Mr. McMahon stated in his report: “.. I interviewed 
twelve (12) persons (listed in Appendix B) who, from the documents, appeared likely to 
have relevant information. …. One additional contact was made by me with a person who 
had made public comments on the issues, but no interview resulted.”
We do not think it reasonable to presume, as you have done, that Mr. McMahon did not 
appreciate the central role of academic freedom in a university setting, and that this 
affected his findings and conclusions in some significant way. His terms of reference asked 
specifically whether Enbridge’s involvement “did … in any fashion attempt to or did it 
compromise the academic freedom of University staff members involved in the Centre”. 
He made a very clear finding on that question, that, “None of the involvement by 
Enbridge as described above resulted in any encroachment upon or compromise of the 
academic freedom of the University or its staff.”
We do not understand your suggestion that Mr. McMahon repeatedly gave the “benefit of 
the doubt” to senior University officials and not to Professor Arvai and Dean Waverman.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
considered 
duct was im
ch evidence
rcely be crit
they find m
icized mere
uggestion t
ent, investig
n which evid
In any eve
sive and on
s aspects o
t inevitably
comment. T
r suggestio
verman sho
ms of refere
n that Mr. 
uld be disre
nce. Profess
ntre of the 
espect to the
You
Wav
term
wer
find
be 
inde
repo
to Professo
a flawed un
th respect to
findings w
pears to be
concerns, in
e at the ce
ings with re
included in
ependent re
inquiry. It 
em, and the
rt “where it
was obviou
e terms of r
ary for Mr. 
make it clear
McMahon t
r that names
o make 
s are to
reference m
sary and cr
t is necess
s of such in
ritical to th
e referred t
ort.”
Y
i
n
y
A
t
C
m
s
c
W
s
Y
t
k
Y
de your lett
omething yo
ter with a 
ou have nev
dealing wi
at you may 
ersity’s resp
that the U
ered. We ca
eject the imp
conduct in 
ment on wha
nquiry is so
not have en
your inquiry
A number o
their concer
Committee 
made by t
something 
characterize
f other univ
rns about
versities hav
ve also decl
lined to par
rticipate in C
CAUT invest
nse to invi
precedented
nate circum
tigations in 
itations from
d public com
mstances we
light of 
m your 
mments
them, and
my two l
ents, and p
your Comm
etters were
precipitated 
mittee. Thes
e in respon
by the unp
se unfortun
o not think
e way you h
which the 
e our respon
e that our 
h 4, 2017 pr
Your August
this respons
keep the Un
t 1 letter w
se, as consis
ill be posted
stent with t
mmunity info
ebsite as yo
ent process
uested, alo
sity has follo
he open an
ormed abou
d transpare
ut the invest
Yours truly,
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
OSGOODE HAL
LAW SCHOOL 
4700 Keele St. 
Toronto ON 
Canada M3J 1P3
Tel 416 736 503
Fax 416 736 573
LL
3 
0 
36 
orku.ca
Septembe
Gordon M
Chair, Boa
University
Administra
2500 Univ
Calgary, A
By
(Board Go
Dear Mr. R
Thank you
We addres
will be pu
substantiv
report to y
correspon
Yours trul
. Ritchie 
ard of Gove
y of Calgary
rnors
ative Buildin
versity Drive
AB T2N 1N4
ng, A165 
e NW
allalba@uca
Coordinator
miranda.da
overnance C
lgary.ca
Miranda Da
llalba)
Ritchie,
u for your le
etter of Augu
ust 15, 201
7.
ss several o
blished soon
ve issues ra
of your conc
cerns in deta
ail in our rep
your respon
port, which
n. We look f
forward to y
report. We a
e this letter
se to the 
u post the 
her 
elease.
ised in the r
e, alongside
is matter, fo
ask that you
your websit
and our oth
e report’s re
ollowing the
dence in th
y,
Professor, F
y of Western
Faculty of In
n Ontario
Gus Van H
Professor,
cc: David
Harten,
, Osgoode H
Hall Law Sch
hool of York
University
irector, CAU
Robinson, E
Executive D
UT
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix G
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
As collaborations between universities1 and external individuals and organizations (donors, 
corporations, governmental agencies and bodies, NGOs, and foundations) proliferate, it is vital 
to have a clear set of principles to protect academic integrity and the public interest. The 
following principles cover various major donor-institutional and inter-institutional collaborative 
agreements, ranging from individual donors providing funding for a university institute or centre 
to broad strategic alliances such as the University of Alberta’s $10-million collaboration with 
Imperial Oil. After each principle, some specification is offered to clarify the context and provide 
some parameters to guide policy development and practice in universities. 
While there can be real benefits to various donor agreements and collaborative arrangements, 
some have threatened or compromised core academic principles and the public missions of 
universities. 
This statement is intended to provide guidance and recommendations for: (a) universities in 
developing policies and procedures governing donor agreements and collaborations; (b) 
governance review, monitoring, and assessment of such agreements and collaborations; (c) 
faculty members and other members of the academic workforce in thinking through a range of 
fundamental professional responsibilities and rights that are implicated and affected by donor 
agreements and collaborations; and (d) academic staff associations in negotiating collective 
agreement provisions to protect the academic freedom and other academic rights of their 
members. 
1. Protect academic freedom and institutional autonomy in research, teaching, 
publication, service, and extramural speech. 
Protecting academic freedom and institutional autonomy should be predominant and prevailing 
considerations in developing, deciding upon, and assessing donor and other collaborations. They 
are fundamental to the integrity of academic work and of the university itself. 
It is fundamental for a democratic society to have an autonomous academy in which academic 
staff have academic freedom in their teaching, their research, their extramural speech, and their 
speech about institutional matters. Academic freedom is essential if academic staff are to fulfil 
their professional and social responsibilities in generating, sharing, and interpreting knowledge 
that can inform decisions about products and important public policy issues. 
Explicit protection of academic freedom must be incorporated into every donor/collaboration 
agreement. Academic freedom must take priority over the short- term potential of individual 
faculty, departments, or of the university to realize material benefits from such work. Better not 
to have the agreements and the monies than to compromise these values and become essentially 
a research and development outpost of donor, corporate, or other outside organizational 
interests. As Canadian Nobel laureate John Polanyi warned, “At a certain point…we don’t have 
universities any more, but outlying branches of industry. Then all the things that industry turns to 
universities for – breadth of knowledge, far time horizons and independent voice – are lost.”
1.These guidelines apply equally to the growing variety of university-affiliated bodies, such as 
university research foundations, centres and institutes, that enter into collaborative university research 
foundations, centres and institutes, that enter into collaborative relationships.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
a. Clear detail must be provided about how faculty may apply for funding in relation to a
donor or other collaborative agreement, and what evaluation and selection criteria will be 
used. Any grants or research funding related to an agreement should be evaluated and 
awarded using academic methods of independent impartial peer review. Anyone involved 
in the peer review and awarding processes should not be in a position to derive any 
financial benefit from the agreement or its corporate donors/partners. Thus, for any work 
that is covered by the agreement, proposals should be evaluated by non- participating 
faculty competent to assess the merit of the proposals. Impartial peer review in the 
selection of research projects is the best way to protect academic freedom by ensuring 
that merit is the basis of the evaluation. University academic staff must have effective and 
clear control of any committee that reviews, selects, and finally approves research 
conducted as part of the collaboration
b. The planning, design, data collection, analysis and dissemination of results should be
under the control of the researchers, not the donor or organizational partner. In the 
conduct of the work, researchers will have access to all data and findings being collected 
in the project. It is not acceptable for researchers to be part of a project in which they 
are unaware of and/or do not have access to data from the larger project.
c. Agreements cannot permit the donor or collaborators to have any right to change the
content of publications nor permit delays in publication for longer than 60 days, and then 
only if there is a compelling reason for the delay. This applies to the work of faculty, 
graduate students, postdocs, academic professionals and undergraduate students. 
d. Any interference with a researcher’s right and responsibility to publish results,
regardless of effect on the collaborating organization, is unacceptable. 
e. Agreements should explicitly recognize the absolute right of researchers to publicly
disclose information about risks to research participants or the general public or threats 
to the public interest that become known in the course of their research. 
f. Restrictions on relationships between faculty or students and “competitors” of the
collaboration partner should be minimized.2 
2. Protect academic integrity in the research and educational functions of the 
university and its faculty, postdocs, students, and professionals. 
The protection of academic integrity involves more than protection against direct intrusion on the 
academic freedom of the researchers and the autonomy of the university. Integrity can also be 
compromised by indirect distortion of the core academic relationships and functions of
2. (a) The group of “competitors” should be defined in advance at the time of entering into an industry 
collaboration agreement, should be as limited as possible, and should in any event include only for- profit 
entities. 
(b) The “when” should be very clear, covering only work done simultaneously for the corporate partner and 
the competitor. 
(c) The “who” should be very clear, covering only the same faculty member or graduate 
 student. 
(d) The “what” should be very clear, covering only similar work as defined in advance at 
the time the faculty member’s project is funded through the industry collaboration agreement. 
Cornell, 2005, p. 13.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
universities and their faculty. It is very important that various aspects of academic relationships 
within the university not be inappropriately influenced by donor or other collaborative research 
arrangements. Nor should the overall work of the university and its units be distorted by such 
agreements.
a. In developing agreements, it is necessary to ensure that educational programs at the
undergraduate and graduate level will not be unduly influenced or distorted by the 
arrangements. Corporate funding of departments, for example, should not lead to 
students doing narrow work in the service of the funders at the expense of the usual 
degree program requirements, nor should it result in change in the curriculum. 
b. Relationships between faculty and graduate students should be safeguarded by ensuring a
bright line between the involvement or non-involvement of the latter in collaborative 
agreements and their admission, program choices, and evaluation. Collaborating 
researchers employed by the donor or collaborating organization should not be involved in 
the recruitment or evaluation of students. 
c. The principal supervisor of any student undertaking research as part of the collaborative
agreement should not have a direct or indirect financial interest in the collaborating 
organization. 
d. The longer term strategic goals of the department, college, and institution should not
be diverted or distorted by the shorter term goals of the collaborative agreements and 
donor arrangements. 
e. The university must ensure that there is no negative impact on the work of others within
the department/faculty/university who choose not to be part of a collaborative 
agreement.
f. In developing agreements, consideration should be given to ways in which the additional
resources provided can support ancillary work in the university not directly undertaken 
through the agreement (e.g., tithing grants to fund non-funded research and indirect 
costs of the agreement that otherwise would have to be borne by the university). The 
threat of distortion is in part a function of the proportion of the 
department/program/college resources devoted to the agreement relative to the overall 
resources of the unit in question. It is also a function of the proportion of 
department/program/college faculty expected to receive much or all of their funding 
through the agreement. 
g. Serious consideration should be given to the likely effect of the agreement on
projects/programs traditionally conducted in the public interest. As in #2.f, where 
possible, consideration should be given to ways in which the additional resources provided 
can support that university’s work. 
h. Academic facilities and classrooms should not be used as sites for commercial marketing
and promotion for the donor or corporate collaborator, or any affiliated entity. Faculty 
must ensure that their universities have clear and consistent policies and practices that 
prohibit companies from distributing meals, gifts, samples, etc., to academic staff and/or 
students, and that bar non-authorized site visits by marketing representatives.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
i. The donor’s, corporation’s, or partner organization’s power to terminate the agreement
prior to the expected term, or to lower the originally committed funding level, must be 
restricted to avoid covert pressure on faculty research agendas and outcomes. 
Agreements should contain a provision that the partner will pay the salaries of project 
personnel for a stated period of time in the event that the partner decides to terminate the 
agreement before the agreed-upon date or to decrease the originally contemplated funding 
level. 
3. Protect the university’s commitment to the free and open exchange of ideas and 
discoveries. 
A central feature of what makes a university a university is that it pursues and advances 
knowledge in the broader interests of society. That is part of what distinguishes it from being a 
corporate lab or the job shop of another organization. That distinction should be evident not only 
in the freedom of faculty and other academic employees to publish their results freely and openly, 
but also in the intellectual property policies of the university and the provisions of the collective 
agreement. Ownership of the scholarly intellectual property by an academic is a vital component 
of academic freedom.33 As well, at its core a university produces knowledge for the general public 
not for any particular individual, corporate, or organizational interest, including its own material 
interest. Intellectual property rights should be pursued in the broad public interest.
a. No agreement should contain any provision that permits or implies that the donor or
corporate collaborator has the right to forbid faculty or graduate students from 
disclosing the agreement’s sponsorship of research.
b. Classified research and/or confidential corporate research that is not intended for
publication and/or dissemination are never appropriate within a university research 
setting, and should never be permitted. 
c. Agreements cannot give donors/partners/collaborating corporations privileged access to or
commercial rights to “background” academic research, which by definition was not funded 
by the industry sponsors but by public and other sources not party to the agreement. 
d. Intellectual property in relation to a donor or corporate collaboration should be consistent
with the faculty association collective agreement or, in the absence of collective 
agreement language, consistent with customary practice for intellectual property created 
by academic staff in the university.
e. Licensing of inventions derived from agreement or donor-funded work should always
reserve academic use and distribution rights, and should be non- exclusive to the extent 
reasonably possible. 
f. Even if an exclusive license is granted, all agreements should include a provision protecting
the university’s right and the right of the researchers to freely use and distribute research 
methods and results to other researchers in academic settings. 
3. See University of British Columbia and University of British Columbia Faculty Association 125 L.A.C. (4th) 1, 
2004 CLB 13966,76 confirmed in 2006 CLB 1705 BCLRB No B56/2006, CASE NO: 51071 “Ownership of the 
copyright in work produced in the course of employment by an academic author, rather than the university 
employer is important to support, foster and preserve academic freedom...”3
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
4. Protect against real, potential, or perceived conflicts of interest, which 
compromise academic integrity. 
One of the greatest threats to the freedom, autonomy, and integrity of academic work, and to the 
public’s support of and confidence in that work, is conflicts of interest, in which professionals have 
a material interest in the outcomes of their work that might affect their professional judgment. 
Similarly, institutions can experience pressures to attract particular research funding or certain 
types of research activities that are self- sustaining, which may compromise their independence 
and public trust. Disclosure is an important mechanism for addressing conflict of interest in the 
academy. But simply disclosing such conflicts is not enough to instill confidence in the public and 
to protect the integrity of the academic work in some highly sensitive and egregious situations. 
There is considerable social science evidence of funding effects on research outcomes in key 
realms of scientific work such as tobacco research and clinical drug trials. Disclosure relies upon 
the professional ethics and judgment of the academic to override the material interests of the 
individual. In general bright lines are required to prohibit even the possibility of professional 
judgment being compromised by the researchers’ material interests.
a. Institutional and individual financial conflicts of interest involving any donor or
collaborating organization must be declared and disclosed to the university and where 
appropriate to the public funding agency. 
b. Researchers and their immediate families should have no direct or indirect financial interest
in any organization funding a collaborative agreement (e.g., equity in the company that 
owns the product, receiving a salary, being a consultant or serving on the scientific advisory 
committee for the organization).
c. Similarly, no member of the university’s senior administration (at the level of president or
vice-president) should have direct or indirect financial interest in any donor or 
collaborative partner organization (such as membership on corporate board or owning of 
stock). 
5. Ensure transparency. 
Transparency is an important mechanism for protecting the public good. Open access to 
knowledge can contribute to greater protection of the public interest, and protect the independent 
role of the faculty and universities in serving the public.
a. At a minimum, all agreements over $250,000 should be public documents. 
b. There should be assessments of the effectiveness and effects (in light of the guiding
principles elaborated in this statement) of each agreement at regular intervals within the 
term of the agreement and these assessments should be public documents made 
available to all members of the university community. 
c. An independent post-agreement evaluation plan must be part of the agreement. The
results of the evaluation should be a public document readily available to the academic 
community. 
d. A database of concerns/complaints that arise during the term of the agreement
should be maintained and should be publicly available.
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
6. Academic staff shall play the central role in decisions regarding the initiation, 
development, implementation, monitoring, and assessment of donor and other 
collaborative agreements. 
An important safeguard of the academic freedom, institutional autonomy, and the integrity of 
academic work conducted in these arrangements is to ensure that academic staff are involved in 
each stage of the agreement. This helps in foregrounding the public interest and public mission of 
universities in participating in donor agreements and collaborations. 
At the same time, there are occasions in which collegial governance structures can be corrupted. 
Faculty committees may act in complicity with a culture of prioritizing the market logic over the 
academic logics of academic freedom and integrity. They may be captured by a sense of what is 
“realistic” to ask of donors and partners to an agreement. They may be reluctant to oppose 
administrative initiatives and pressure for fear of retaliation or out of an overly narrow and 
constrained view of their role in the decision- making process. It may, on occasion be necessary 
for national bodies to step in and act in defence of academic freedom, autonomy, and integrity of 
the academic work.
a. No donor or other collaborative agreement may be allowed to intrude on academic
governance or contravene existing academic policies or collective agreements. 
b. In no case, should a funder or a private collaborator or their representatives have any
voice in matters related to the academic affairs of the institution or academic aspects of 
the collaboration. 
c. Donor and other collaborative agreements should be governed by a committee at least
2/3rds of whom are elected academic staff members who do not hold administrative 
positions. The academic staff component should include both those who are involved in 
the agreement and those that are not. 
d. The day to day management of the agreement should be conducted predominantly by
university faculty not by representatives of the external funder. 
7. Ensure that the structure of employment for researchers protects academic freedom 
and academic autonomy, and that it does not compromise the structure and 
preponderance of tenured and tenure track faculty employment. 
It is in the public interest and the interest of the public missions of the university for members of 
the academic workforce to have safeguards to ensure substantive and procedural fairness and 
financial autonomy that are at the core of independent professional work. It does not serve 
students, the institution, or society well if researchers in donor or other collaborative agreements 
are essentially professionals for hire, working largely on commission.
a. Ensure that faculty and researchers involved in donor agreements and/or collaborative
arrangements have explicit protection for academic freedom, under a collective 
agreement. 
b. Ensure that faculty and researchers involved in donor or other collaborative agreements
are not dependent for most of their university-related income on work covered by those 
arrangements. 
c. Donor and other collaborative agreements should protect and support tenure and security
Report \\ Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability \ University of Calgary
Appendix H
of employment for participating academic staff; agreements should neither be based on 
nor significantly increase the employment of non- tenure track or soft-money academic 
employment.
REFERENCES
Jennifer Washburn, Big Oil Goes to College: An Analysis of 10 Research Collaboration Contracts
between Leading Energy Companies and Major U.S. Universities. [Executive Summary]. 
Washington: Centre For American Progress, 2010. 
Cornell University, Faculty Statement of Principles & Best Practices Concerning Strategic
Corporate Alliances. Spring 2005.