Menu
Search
Sign In
Nova Scotia
Controversial prof !red for privacy breach,
harassment, Acadia letter reveals
Dr. Rick Mehta, a tenured professor and self-styled !rebrand for 'academic free
speech,' was !red on Aug. 31
Mairin Prentiss · CBC News · Posted: Sep 12, 2018 12:16 PM EDT | Last Updated: September 12, 2018
Listen to this article
Estimated 9 minutes
Acadia University associate professor Rick Mehta is shown in a handout photo. He stoked a national debate
about free speech on campus after making controversial comments on social media and in the classroom,
and was !red from his post in late August. (Rick Mehta/The Canadian Press)
Acadia University says professor Rick Mehta harassed and intimidated his colleagues and
students, breached privacy and failed to teach the required course material — all allegations in
a letter outlining why the school !red the controversial faculty member.
Those are just some of the numerous complaints levelled against Mehta and summarized in an
eight-page letter he provided to CBC News. Many of the complaints were documented over the
past year while he was a tenured associate professor of psychology at the Wolfville, N.S.,
university.
Mehta, a self-styled !rebrand for "academic free speech," was !red on Aug. 31. He believes he
was !red because he spoke out against the university's new mission of "committing to social
justice."
The Acadia University Faculty Association said last week it considers the !ring of a tenured
professor "very serious" and plans to take his dismissal to arbitration. Mehta is still receiving
his $112,527 annual salary and bene!ts pending the outcome of the arbitration.
While Mehta said the university gave him "broad and unspeci!ed reasons" for being let go, the
letter — written by the university's Vice-President of Academic Heather Hemming on Aug. 3 —
delivers a detailed review of the school's grounds for disciplinary action against him, which
ultimately led to his dismissal.
'Reprehensible' actions
In the letter, Hemming writes that it is "reprehensible" that Mehta posted to a publicly
available Dropbox account a recording of one of his classes in which a student disclosed her
rape experience.
"This action further demonstrates your disregard for the privacy rights of students and
suggests you are more concerned with public online support than the interests of students,"
Hemming wrote.
The letter also states that Mehta's conduct toward students and colleagues created a
"poisoned" work and teaching environment, noting that Mehta posted criticism of colleagues
to social media.
"Many members of the psychology department have expressed genuine concern for their
safety," Hemming wrote.
Mehta said he doesn't know why his colleagues would be concerned, adding that he is a quiet,
soft-spoken person.
"Since I started to become outspoken, all my colleagues stopped talking to me," he said.
Mehta said some of his colleagues had panic buttons installed in their o#ces because they
were afraid of him. He discovered this when he read a report into the complaints against him
by Dalhousie University professor emeritus Wayne MacKay.
'Voluminous' details
Hemming also cites the external three-month long investigation overseen by MacKay as well
as an internal investigation conducted by Acadia's Dean of Science Je$ Hooper, while noting
the supporting details are too "voluminous" to repeat in the letter.
Mehta said he was only o$ered limited time to review the reports from MacKay and Hooper
before being !red.
He wasn't allowed to have a copy of the reports unless he signed an agreement preventing
him from distributing any con!dential information related to complaints against him or
retaliating against any complainants.
"It's the secrecy that prevented me from not agreeing to those conditions," said Mehta in an
interview with CBC News.
Complaints from faculty
Mehta said the university is using their harassment and discrimination policies to suppress his
dissent against the school's "social justice" agenda.
"By de!nition, if we're committing to one point of view then the other alternatives can't even
be discussed, much less debated," said Mehta.
He objects to the university's statement that his dismissal was not in response to his rights to
free speech and academic freedom, but in response to numerous complaints from members of
faculty, sta$ and students regarding unprofessional and inappropriate conduct.
"That's their claim," said Mehta. "But the evidence for those claims are weak. There's no
speci!cs provided for each of those broad categories, so they can just say 'academic
misconduct' but you can always say, 'Why was whatever I happened to say happened to be
objectionable?'"
In the letter, Hemming writes that Mehta has made "rude, intolerant and degrading
comments" to students. Several students give examples of such interactions with Mehta, and
CBC News has redacted their names from the letter below to protect their privacy.
They include one example where Mehta told an Intro to Psychology class that sexual assault
survivors are not victims and women are assaulted because they put themselves in dangerous
environments.
Social media posts
Quoting the MacKay report, Hemming wrote that Mehta made numerous discriminatory or
harassing posts on social media.
You seem to be under the
impression that your rights of
'free speech' and academic
freedom trump all other
obligations to the university
- Heather Hemming, Acadia's vice-president, academic
"Indigenous peoples, racialized minorities, women, sexual identity and gender expression,
Hemming wrote that Mehta does not appear to recognize his responsibilities under Acadia's
harassment and discrimination policy.
"You seem to be under the impression that your rights of 'free speech' and academic freedom
trump all other obligations to the university and members of the university community," wrote
Hemming.
'Perspectives are subjective'
Mehta said he never discriminated or harassed students or colleagues.
"I have never done any of the acts that have been attributed to me," said Mehta.
"There might have been a dispute, but it would not have been how most reasonable people
would de!ne harassment or discrimination."
When asked if he harassed or intimidated students, Mehta said, "perspectives are subjective.
It was only from a small number of students in the course.
"So what's ignored is the larger number of other students who … actually thought it was
refreshing that I was actually trying to get them to think in the !rst place, much less think
critically," said Mehta.
Mehta recalled a time when he upset students by saying in class that much of the hate and
division in society could be stemming from our education system teaching "identity politics."
"I know that that upset a number of students and they'd walked out from my classes. At one
point one student even screamed out, 'Next time try teaching psychology!'" said Mehta.
Mehta takes issue with what he said is a lack of methodology in the reports.
"How do you know what people were actually selected? How do you know that people were
asked questions that were fair and not misleading?"
Many of the complaints against Dr. Rick Mehta were documented over the past year while he was a tenured
associate professor of psychology at the Wolfville, N.S., university. He has taught there since 2003.
(Elizabeth McMillan/CBC)
'Harmful e!ects'
For the past several months, concerns, cautions and counselling over the "harmful e$ects" of
Mehta's teaching, interactions with faculty and students and social media use have been
brought to his attention, but have fallen on deaf ears, Hemming wrote.
"Instead of taking responsibility for your actions, you have de!antly refused to adjust any of
your conduct and 'doubled down' on this activity by seeking support from free speech
advocates outside the university community under the guise of 'freedom of expression' and
'academic freedom.'"
The letter also says Mehta's lessons contained signi!cant deviations from the curriculum,
according to an analysis conducted by his colleagues.
"A signi!cant amount of class time (in some classes 90% or more) was spent on topics which
are irrelevant, or not connected to the course syllabus," wrote Hemming.
She goes on to write that he did not deliver the course the university contracted him to teach,
part of what she described as a "serious breach" of Mehta's responsibilities as a professor.
The letter states that in mid-January, Mehta's regular use of "irrelevant" non-academic
sources in class was informally brought to his attention by the school, yet Mehta made no
changes.
Mehta said nothing was informally brought to his attention. He said the university always
proceeded to discipline him without any warnings.
Mehta said he o$ered a few concessions to the university before they !red him: To move
o#ces away from his colleagues that may have been uncomfortable around him, teach
di$erent courses and not be Facebook friends with students while they're in his courses.
The university was not interested in his o$ers, he said.
Mehta has no regrets
Hemming disputes Mehta's claim that his teaching approach of o$ering di$erent perspectives
and being "provocative to promote critical thinking" is the reality in his classroom.
"Students report that you are quick to shut down people who disagree with your perspective
and that you often ignore students who you do not wish to hear or respond to," Hemming
wrote.
Mehta said he had no regrets about his comments, actions or teaching style.
He said he was bringing up di$erent points of view, which were backed up with academic or
non-academic evidence.
Popular Now in News
Mehta said he's received some support from the public and a few academics such as Jordan
Peterson — a controversial psychologist who contends that political correctness throttles free
speech.
Peterson said the Acadia documents should be made public, in a tweet on Sunday.
A cyberattack hit universities worldwide,
including top Canadian schools. Here's
what we know
Mehta said he agrees with Peterson.
FIRST PERSON
In the university's statement, spokesperson Scott Roberts said academic freedom, free
Busy city life ground us down. Our move to
the prairies gave us the quiet we needed
speech, and open debate are actively encouraged and vigorously defended at Acadia, however
the university requires its campus to be free from harassment and intimidation.
UPDATED
Pedestrian dies after being hit by plane
taking o! at Denver airport
Mobile users: View the document
(PDF KB)
(Text KB)
B.C. man feels 'very fortunate' to be alive
after nearly dying from hantavirus 3 years
ago
CBC is not responsible for 3rd party content
Toddler dies after pulled from Ottawa
River