Controversial University of 
Lethbridge professor has suspension 
lifted
By Joe Scarpelli Global News
WATCH: Controversial University of Lethbridge professor Dr. Anthony Hall 
returned to work on Thursday after being accused of spreading conspiracy 
theories. Joe Scarpelli reports.
A controversial University of Lethbridge professor returned to work on
Thursday after being suspended for spreading conspiracy theories.
Dr. Anthony Hall was suspended without pay in October of 2016 following
comments he made online suggesting there was a Zionist connection to the
9/11 attacks, and that the events of the Holocaust should be up for debate.
READ MORE: Alberta professor suspended without pay after anti-
Semitic content posted to his Facebook page
The university’s board of governors and faculty association did not grant
interview requests because of legal issues at play. Instead, they issued a
joint statement regarding Dr. Hall’s return to the classroom.
“The Board of Governors of the University of Lethbridge and the University
of Lethbridge Faculty Association have agreed that the outstanding issues
that have been raised concerning Dr. Anthony Hall will be addressed in the
context of the faculty handbook. As a result, the suspension imposed on Dr.
Hall has been lifted and he has returned back to work at the University,” the
statement said. “The parties will be fully participating in the agreed upon
processes in the faculty handbook to investigate and address the
outstanding issues.”
READ MORE: Human rights complaint filed against controversial
University of Lethbridge professor
Two months after Hall was suspended, the university filed a complaint
against him to the Alberta Human Rights Commission over comments
Jewish groups have called anti-Semitic.
Hall’s pay was reinstated at the time, citing the potential length of the
complaint process.
Global News spoke to the commission on Thursday but, due to privacy
issues, no information on the status of the case was provided.
Hall has spent over two and a half decades at the U of L, teaching Native
American studies, liberal education and globalization.
© 2017 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc.