Menu
Search
Sign In
Calgary
Enbridge, U of C and me: Joe Arvai speaks up
for 1st time
Former director of U of C's controversial Enbridge Centre speaks out for the !rst
time
CBC News · Posted: Nov 07, 2015 9:00 AM EST | Last Updated: November 7, 2015
Listen to this article
Estimated 6 minutes
Joe Arvai, who was the director of the former Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability (since renamed)
at the University of Calgary, raised repeated concerns to university administration about how much
in"uence the company had at the centre. (Twitter @DecisionLab)
Joe Arvai has been a recurring "gure in the CBC investigation this week examining the
relationship between Enbridge and the University of Calgary. Arvai was the director of the
Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability, which was renamed the Centre for Corporate
Sustainability last fall. He declined interview requests, but was quoted frequently from emails
and other documents obtained by the CBC. Arvai raised repeated concerns to university
administration about how much in#uence the company had at the centre. Both Enbridge and
the university deny the company had any control. Arvai submitted this letter to appear as an
opinion piece in the The Globe and Mail, reprinted with permission by the CBC. Arvai is currently
the Max McGraw Professor of Sustainable Enterprise at the University of Michigan.
CBC INVESTIGATES: How the University of Calgary's Enbridge relationship became
controversial
CBC INVESTIGATES: U of C sta" suspected Michigan partnership was for Enbridge PR
I was one of the subjects this week of a series of CBC reports about the alleged in"uence
Enbridge Pipelines may have exerted on an academic centre I led while a faculty member at
the University of Calgary. Understandably, I've received several requests for comment from
journalists since the CBC story broke. My position on these requests has been to politely
decline them. The CBC has done an exceptional job of getting the facts correct, which has
made it easy for me to let the story speak for itself.
I've also declined invitations to speak out because my involvement in the Enbridge Centre was
neither enjoyable, nor memorable for any reasons I would call "good". It placed my reputation
at risk; it took a personal and psychological toll at home; and it damaged my faith in a
university that I still believe can do remarkable things.
However, some of the responses to the CBC story from Enbridge and from the University of
Calgary have made me reconsider my earlier position.
First of all, when it comes to corporate donations to universities – like the one for the
Enbridge Centre – I believe that donors have every right to raise certain questions, and to
have measured expectations. For example, I think donors should be able to suggest – but not
necessarily select – individuals who could e$ectively serve in an advisory capacity. And, they
should be granted a meaningful voice in the dialog that results in the establishment of a
centre's name and mission. They should not be allowed to require that support from an
academic centre be limited only to individuals who share their "core values."
Corporate and philanthropic donations to universities are not rare. When done right, which I
believe to be the case more often than not, these donations often serve as the foundation for
positive and impactful scholarly work. Indeed, I was the bene!ciary of many such partnerships
outside of the Enbridge Centre while I was at the U of C. Likewise, I never experienced
Popular Now in News
Trump's dismissal of Americans' in!ation
concerns fuels Democrats' midterm
campaigns
anything like what happened in the Enbridge Centre in the positions I held prior to my joining
the U of C. And, I have absolutely no concerns about – nor have I seen any evidence of –
undue corporate in"uence in my current position.
CBC INVESTIGATES
A disabled man living in a group home
died malnourished in hospital. His family
wants answers
It's also worth remembering that an institution like the U of C, or a company like Enbridge,
isn't a monolithic entity. It's convenient, but ultimately inaccurate, to point the !nger at the
UPDATED
entirety of an institution as being systemically "awed. Bottom line: I had – and still have –
great friends and colleagues at the U of C, as well as at Enbridge. They are rich with great
ideas, and they work according to a well-calibrated moral compass.
Mother charged with murder in death of 1-
year-old girl: Toronto police
Montreal grandparent scammer spent
victims' money on cocaine, cars and
parties: court documents
Fentanyl ingredients entering Canada via
Vancouver en route to cartel-run drug
labs, U.S. DEA boss says
However, in my opinion, the CBC story correctly points to several instances where certain
wishes expressed by o%cials at Enbridge, and ultimately granted by o%cials at the U of C,
were incompatible with the mission of a new academic centre that needed to be built upon a
foundation of academic and scholarly independence. In light of what I went through at the
time, the post hoc suggestions by some that decisions made by the U of C in setting up the
Enbridge Centre were transparent, legitimate, and free of corporate interference or con"ict-of-
interest are as di%cult for me to accept today as they were in 2012.
It is appealing at times like these to look for scapegoats. In reading the reports and social
media posts about the Enbridge Centre, it's pretty clear to me that people are outraged, and
are looking for heads to roll.
My own view is that times like these are perfect for re"ection, and for sowing the seeds of
positive change. The postmortem on the Enbridge Centre at the University of Calgary provides
many teachable moments about the institutional, professional, and personal damage that
poorly thought out agreements, and overly cozy relationships may produce, especially when
hard and necessary questions go unanswered.
Likewise, times like this shine a much-needed spotlight on the importance of having in place
academic leadership that is built on a foundation of transparency, trust, and integrity. The
events surrounding the creation of the Enbridge Centre re"ect signi!cant failures in
leadership. I taught my MBA students in the U of C's Haskayne School that e$ective
leadership is in large part a function of good judgment, and defensible decision-making. With
this lesson in mind, all of the stakeholders that ought to bene!t from a well-managed public
university like the University of Calgary – students and their parents, sta$, faculty, taxpayers,
and donors – deserve this kind of leadership. Indeed, they have every right to demand it.
This video captures the exact
moment a bridge collapses in
northern Sask.
‘How is that even possible?’:
Crash leaves motorbike
dangling
Trump wanted revenge —
and he got it | About That
The facts about Canada’s
2026 census
About That
CBC News
Canada's Sidney Crosby set
to make 4th appearance at
men's world hockey
championship
Search continues for pair in
Thunder Bay, Ont., who were
last seen at abandoned grain
elevator
World Cup will be missing
some star players as injuries
mount before big kicko!
Desiring a fresh start, Maple
Leafs "re head coach Craig
Berube after 2 seasons
Sarah Law
James Robson
Joshua Clipperton
Sports - Hockey - NHL
Canada - Thunder Bay
Sports - Soccer
Sports - Hockey - NHL