Menu
Search
Sign In
Calgary
Faculty seeks provincial probe into academic
freedom at University of Calgary
The U of C's faculty association calls out corporate creep at the post-secondary
institution
Tracy Johnson · CBC News · Posted: Oct 13, 2017 3:23 PM EDT | Last Updated: October 13, 2017
Listen to this article
Estimated 5 minutes
Sandra Hoenle, chair of the University of Calgary's faculty association, says corporate structures are
inappropriate for collegiate governance. (CBC)
The University of Calgary's Faculty Association is calling for the provincial government to
probe governance at the university saying the for-pro!t structures have no place in a collegial
setting.
In a letter written to U of C faculty Thursday night, the chair of the faculty association, Sandra
Hoenle, wrote:
"One of the greatest concerns is the domination of the senior administration in the
governance processes of the University. The failures of the checks and balances intended in
e#ective collegial governance are signi!cant.
Academic freedom compromised by U of C, watchdog group !nds
How the University of Calgary's Enbridge relationship became controversial
"One of the failures in governance has been the Board of Governors' and the Senior
Administration's misapplication of for-pro!t corporate structures within a university collegial
setting. Rather than being a place of transparency and open debate re$ecting the University
as a public institution accountable to the academic and broader communities, the Governors
and Administration have used for-pro!t corporate structures to keep decision-making behind
closed doors and controlled by the privileged few."
In an interview with CBC News, Hoenle said the corporate approach is inappropriate.
"Collegial governance is really being diminished at the university," she said. "This is an
ongoing, long concern and no one seems to be addressing it. And there's really this corporate
creep, and the thing is — we're not a corporation. Universities are not corporations."
CAUT Investigation
Hoenle was responding to an investigation by the Canadian Association of University of
Teachers (CAUT) into the formation of the Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability in
2011 and 2012.
The investigation found there was a clear appearance of a con$ict of interest on the part of U
of C president Elizabeth Cannon's paid role as a board member of an Enbridge subsidiary,
while still being involved in discussions about the formation of the research centre funded by
the pipeline giant.
The university teachers association also found that the academic freedom of former professor
Joe Arvai was compromised because of the university's mishandling of the Enbridge
centre. Arvai was hired at the U of C in 2011 and was to be the director of the Enbridge Centre.
He repeatedly expressed concerns about academic freedom in emails over the period of late
2011 and early 2012 and alleges that he was removed from the his role after he stated his
opposition to Enbridge's  Northern Gateway pipeline project.
Enbridge, U of C and me: Joe Arvai speaks up for 1st time
U of C sta" suspected Michigan partnership was for Enbridge PR
He later left the university and is now the director of the Erb Institute for Global Sustainable
Enterprise at the University of Michigan.
Joe Arvai was concerned his academic freedom was going to be compromised while working as director of
the Enbridge Centre before its launch. (University of Calgary)
In an interview with CBC News, Arvai welcomed the report.
Popular Now in News
"The report from the CAUT is factually accurate, and in light of those accuracies, I think it's
wholly appropriate for the faculty association to be asking for a provincial review," said Arvai.
Trump's dismissal of Americans' in!ation
concerns fuels Democrats' midterm
campaigns
A CBC News investigation in 2015 prompted the CAUT report. That investigation included
complaints from professors and emails obtained through a freedom of information request.
The investigation suggested a university bending over backward to accommodate the
apparent public relations ambitions of a corporate patron and the dismissed concerns about
academic independence by professors.
CBC INVESTIGATES
A disabled man living in a group home
died malnourished in hospital. His family
wants answers
UPDATED
Mother charged with murder in death of 1-
year-old girl: Toronto police
University of Calgary investigation into Enbridge controversy clears Elizabeth Cannon
The board of governors at the University of Calgary commissioned its own investigation into
Montreal grandparent scammer spent
victims' money on cocaine, cars and
parties: court documents
the formation of the centre. That investigation was led by retired justice Terrence McMahon.
He found no wrongdoing on the part of university o%cials.
Fentanyl ingredients entering Canada via
Vancouver en route to cartel-run drug
labs, U.S. DEA boss says
In a statement earlier in the week, the University of Calgary board of governors chair Gordon
Ritchie said the board felt the McMahon report had properly cleared the university and its
o%cials of any wrongdoing and considered the matter closed.
Province reviewing academic freedom
Benjamin Lof, spokesperson for Alberta's Ministry of Advanced Education, said in a
statement that con$icts of interest are being examined at the public boards in the province
NDP launch review of 300 Alberta agencies, boards and commissions
"Academic freedom is a cornerstone of any university, and that principle will continue to be
maintained in Alberta," Lof said.
"Albertans must have con!dence that our boards are governing Alberta's post-secondary
institutions e#ectively and have high ethical standards in place including transparent con$ict
of interest policies and practices. That's why our government is reviewing post-secondary
board governance and con$ict of interest through our review of agencies, boards, and
commissions."
In her letter to faculty, Hoenle said the provincial governance review had been truncated in
recent months and she wants to ensure that it is expanded to speci!cally deal with issues that
were identi!ed in the CAUT and CBC Investigations.
MORE CALGARY NEWS | Smith leads Nenshi by 13 points in !nal Mainstreet poll
before Calgary election
MORE CALGARY NEWS | 'Business support fee' chopped at Calgary Brazilian
steakhouse amid backlash, threats
This video captures the exact
moment a bridge collapses in
northern Sask.
‘How is that even possible?’:
Crash leaves motorbike
dangling
Trump wanted revenge —
and he got it | About That
The facts about Canada’s
2026 census
About That
CBC News