Independent student newspaper of Bishop’s University
Home
News
Opinions
Sports
Features
Arts & Culture
Business & Economics
About Us
Investigation reveals new details on sociology
professor’s slur controversy
February 3, 2025
7–10 minutes
News
By Jillian French – News Editor & Irma
Susset – Editor-in-Chief
Content warning — mentions of racism,
homophobia, Islamophobia and slurs
Photo courtesy of Emily Crunican
An investigation by The Campus has
revealed new details about a Bishop’s
sociology professor whose winter 2025
classes were reassigned after a CTV story
alleged she said a homophobic slur multiple
times in a sociology class in fall 2024. Upon
meeting with students and faculty, The
Campus discovered more about the context
of Gosselin’s use of the slur, a student’s
formal complaint, and how the university
plans to make the complaint processes more
accessible to students.
On January 15, an email was sent out to the
student body on behalf of Principal
Sébastien Lebel-Grenier citing “a recent
media article relating to inappropriate
language in a classroom.” The email followed
a CTV article published January 13, in
which Cheryl Gosselin, a professor in the
Bishop’s sociology department, is alleged to
have used the f-slur in a ﬁrst-year class and
making oﬀensive comments in another
course she taught.
Homophobic slurs in the classroom
Several students raised concerns about
Gosselin’s alleged repeated use of the
homophobic slur during a ﬁrst-year Gender
and Sociology course (SOC129) in the fall of
2024.
Allister Coursol, ﬁrst year sociology student,
described how the slur was ﬁrst used in the
context of a class about gender-based
bullying on November 12, 2024, where
Gosselin referred to an article about
disproportionate bullying targeting
feminine boys. Coursol told The Campus
that Gosselin used the slur when quoting the
article, but then “kept asking questions, like
‘what does this mean, f-g”. They noted how
uncomfortable it made the class: “She kept
saying it, and no one was answering.”
Mia Deuter, ﬁrst year modern languages
student, shared the article Gosselin quoted,
Joel Mittleman’s “Homophobic Bullying as
Gender Policing: Population-Based
Evidence,” published in 2022 in the journal
Gender & Society. The particular section
details the way young bullies “would never
harass someone for being ‘gay,’ but only for
being ‘a f-g.’” According to the students,
Gosselin used the slur when quoting the text
– the slur is uncensored in Mittleman’s
article – but kept repeating it as she
attempted to prompt further discussion.
“There was a gasp,” said Aaliyah Wilburn,
one of the students interviewed in the
January 13 CTV article. Wilburn raised her
hand to express her discomfort with the slur,
but felt dismissed by Gosselin’s response.
She says Gosselin told students who raised
concerns that they were “shoot[ing] the
messenger instead of the actual message”.
Deuter and Coursol added that Gosselin
told them that it was important to
“destigmatize” this language.
Deuter, Coursol and Wilburn also
mentioned that Gosselin made comments in
the fall Gender and Society class implying
that hijab-wearing women judge white
women for wearing revealing clothing,
comments they felt were Islamophobic and
inappropriate. This sentiment was echoed
by Marie-May Lamothe in the CTV article.
When the CTV story was published,
Gosselin had started teaching Sociology of
the Body, (SOC219) and Quebec Society 1
(SOC102) for the Winter 2025 semester. On
Tuesday, January 14 (one day after the CTV
article was published) both classes were
cancelled; Thursday, January 16, Gosselin
taught both classes without acknowledging
the article. The following week, the classes
were taken over by Dr. Travis Smith (sports
studies department) and Dr. David Webster
(history department), according to several
students registered in the courses.
Photo courtesy of Emily Crunican
Gosselin faces backlash
Wilburn wrote to the university’s Equity,
Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) advisor the
afternoon the incident took place, reporting
the situation as ‘concerning’ and describing
how several students were left with ‘feelings
of discouragement’. Wilburn lodged a formal
complaint with the university against
Gosselin, but has not received recent
information on whether it is still in process.
Upon inquiry, Andrew Webster, Vice-
Principal Academics and Research, could
not comment on the status of the complaint.
He added that he understands that it may be
frustrating for students to feel like they are
missing information, but “Quebec and
Canada have real laws on privacy, and we
can’t discuss or disclose information on
conﬁdential processes or private
information… speaking generally, if a
complaint is brought forward, there are very
strict rules about who gets informed about
it, including the outcome.”
Wilburn said that she submitted the
complaint because it is her “duty to help
create inclusive and safe space for students
across board,” but added that she felt talking
to CTV was also important to hold Gosselin
publicly accountable.
History and timeline of previous
complaints
A sociology student described an incident in
winter, 2023, in which Gosselin dismissed a
student who raised concerns about the lack
of Indigenous representation in ﬁrst-year
course Quebec Society. Markayza Mitchell,
the student who raised concerns, told The
Campus that Gosselin told her she shouldn’t
be imposing her perspective on the rest of
the class, and pointed to the door, telling her
she could choose to leave. “I didn’t feel
respected at all”, Mitchell added. She later
dropped the class, a required ﬁrst-year
sociology course, which has impacted her
ability to graduate this winter.
When Leana Ceresoli started her mandate as
Social Science Senator in May of 2024, a
position ﬁlled by a student in the
department who sits on the Senate and the
BSR, she had been made aware of Gosselin’s
controversy within the department by
multiple students complaining informally
about separate undisclosed incidents in
Gosselin’s 2023 Quebec Society course.
Ceresoli relayed these concerns to Roser
Rise, serving as Student Representative
Council Vice-President of Academic Aﬀairs
at the time. Rise says she worked with
Webster to create a more clearly deﬁned
structure for formal complaints over the
next few weeks. Ceresoli forwarded these
resources to students who had complained
informally, but they did not wish to pursue
the formal complaint process, limiting the
University’s ability to properly investigate
the claims.
Ceresoli adds that Gosselin did apologize for
the incident in a subsequent class. Despite
her work as a TA for Gosselin’s fall 2024
Gender and Society course, where Gosselin
allegedly said the f-slur repeatedly, Ceresoli
was not in class at that time and says she was
unaware of any use of slurs. She told The
Campus that she was surprised that students
had not told her about the incident.
Although she understands the complaint
process may feel “intimidating,” she
encourages students to “please come and
talk to your senators: we can’t do anything
unless we know what’s going on.”
Bishop’s responds
The Campus met on Friday with Webster,
who said the university is in the process of
reviewing its policies, reiterating “that we
really are committed to providing an
inclusive, safe, respectful environment for
everyone.” He also added that student
complaints are taken “very seriously.”
Although he could not comment on
Gosselin’s case speciﬁcally, The Campus
asked Webster to elaborate on academic
freedom policies at Bishop’s, which he says
“is obviously a bedrock of universities” but
also invites a diﬃcult and complex
conversation.
“You have to be able to study diﬃcult
concepts, and you have to be able to
recognize that these diﬃcult concepts
involve issues that are highly charged and
can be distressing,” he says. “The answer, of
course, is not to say that these things cannot
be discussed… the important thing to do is
to ensure that the context in which they are
discussed in the classroom is framed in an
appropriate way.”
“The fundamental thing,” he adds, “is
ﬁnding a way to teach it in a way that is both
meaningful – and that does mean that it’s
going to be challenging, you can’t get away
from it – but at the same time, framing a
subject in a way that is sensitive to the fact
that some students will ﬁnd it diﬃcult.”
“None of that permits hate speech… but it
does mean that you can’t impose pre-
conditions in terms of what they
[professors] are allowed to say within their
area of expertise.”
More information can be found in the
Bishop’s University policy on academic
freedom, the university statutes, and the
collective agreement for faculty. The
collective agreement says academic freedom
is “the right to teach, investigate, speculate
and publish without deference to
prescribed doctrine.”
What next?
In the principal’s email, he told students that
“We will be pursuing a conversation in
Senate… on ways to better communicate
resources and processes available to
students.” During the Senate meeting,
Webster proposed that a link to university
resources should be integrated into course
syllabi to standardize communication and
resource accessibility to students. The
proposition quickly turned into a debate on
professorial autonomy and administrative
overreach in syllabi. Webster commented on
the meeting: “Our established process at
senate is to bring things always at least
twice, if it’s a signiﬁcant change – ﬁrst time
for discussion; second for decision.” He
assured students that “in the time between
now and the next senate meeting, the ASAP
committee – Academic Standing
Admissions Policy – is going to revisit it [the
proposal] so that we can do some of the re-
drafting… the intention is absolutely to bring
this back.”
The Campus reached out to Gosselin, who
did not respond to a request for comment.
Upon inquiry, Webster added that “it’s my
understanding that she has no wish to make
any comment in response to queries on this
issue, and she would prefer that she not be
contacted any further.”
This article was edited on Tuesday, Feb. 11
10:32 p.m. to include a description of the
incident that occurred in Winter 2023.
Sports
Ringette: a club
deep-dive and
insight into
next season
Sports
Cheers, tears
and a Gaiter
reveal?
The Campus
The Campus
Sports
A season to
remember: BU
Men’s Club
Hockey honour
a season built
on commitment
Opinions
The best thing
you can do at
Bishop’s is get
involved
The Campus
The Campus
The Campus acknowledges that the land on which we operate is stolen land, the
traditional territory of the Abenaki people. We live, learn, work, and play on this
land, home to Indigenous peoples still living. Canada was founded through
colonization, a system rooted in oppression and the abuse of power over others,
continuing to aﬀect First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities today. As a
student newspaper, The Campus has a responsibility to highlight truth. We are
committed to prioritizing underrepresented voices in our community and
proactively highlighting Indigenous peoples’ histories and ongoing realities,
including their resilience and achievements. We recognize our work plays a role in
shaping public perceptions, being able to call-out injustice but also call-in action.
We emphasize that we must go beyond a land acknowledgement, which is only
one step towards reconciliation. It is the stories in our paper – told with respect,
accuracy, and integrity – and the respect and humility we show to the land and
others that is more important than what is written in a land acknowledgement.
Actionable steps to go beyond a land acknowledgement include educating
ourselves and others, and supporting Indigenous traditions, movements, and
businesses. – The Campus team
Home
About Us
Write for us