Alberta university lodges rights complaint over 
professor accused of sharing anti-Semitic views 
Lauren Krugel, The Canadian Press | January 16, 2017 | Last Updated: Jan 17 12:12 AM ET 
LETHBRIDGE, Alta. — The University of Lethbridge says it is lodging a complaint 
with the Alberta Human Rights Commission about a longtime professor accused 
of espousing anti-Semitic views. 
Anthony Hall was suspended without pay in October following comments he 
made in online articles and videos suggesting there was a Zionist connection to 
the 9/11 attacks and that the events of the Holocaust should be up for debate. 
The university says its board of governors reviewed whether a complaint was 
warranted and justifiable. 
“From the findings of that assessment, the board has decided to proceed with a 
complaint to the Alberta Human Rights Commission against Dr. Hall for publishing 
statements, alone and in collaboration with others, that could be considered 
hateful, contemptuous and discriminatory,” it said in a statement Monday. 
Separately, the administration is reviewing complaints made against Hall by 
members of the university community. 
The university said Hall’s pay has been reinstated because of how long the Alberta 
Human Rights Commission might take. 
A commission spokeswoman said it could take years for a complaint to be heard 
by a tribunal. 
Susan Coombes said details of complaints are kept confidential unless they 
proceed to a tribunal. There are a number of ways complaints can be resolved up 
to that point, she added.
Hall — a tenured professor who has taught Native American studies, liberal 
education and globalization over his 26 years at the university — said he last week 
received a letter dated Dec. 19 from university president Michael Mahon 
informing him of the complaint. 
In the letter, which Hall provided to The Canadian Press, Mahon said that aside 
from pay, all other terms of the suspension remain unchanged. Hall is banned 
from teaching or supervising students, nor can he conduct research in the name 
of the university, use his affiliation with the university or set foot on campus. 
Hall said the complaint is a way for the administration to manoeuvre around its 
collective agreement with faculty. 
“It represents an enormous effort to change the landscape of higher education in 
Canada,” he said. 
“I was ripped from the classroom mid-term in October and my students were 
deprived of the course they chose and the professor they chose.” 
Both the University of Lethbridge Faculty Association and the Canadian 
Association of University Teachers criticized Hall’s suspension before any official 
finding of wrongdoing. 
Amanda Hohmann with B’nai Brith Canada said she’s pleased with how the 
university has handled the situation and says the reinstatement of Hall’s pay isn’t 
a vindication. 
“Certainly, we would support anything that means that the complaint would be 
handled properly and is going to succeed,” she said. 
“We would hate to see something like this thrown out on a technicality.” 
Hohmann said Hall’s appearance earlier this month on a radio show posted on 
Stormfront — a white nationalist website that describes itself as a “community of 
racial realists and idealists” — shows the complaint is not an assault on the 
institution of tenure, as Hall argues, but a defence of human rights.
“Instead of being repentant or apologizing for his behaviour, he’s doubled down 
and he’s gone even further down the rabbit hole of anti-Semitism,” she said. 
Hall said his participation in the segment — which touched on his suspension, 
9/11 theories and the plight of indigenous people, among other things — was not 
an endorsement of Stormfront beliefs. 
“It must be understood that my position is very different than that of those who 
would segregate territory based on race,” he said. 
“I condemn that and I think it’s important that we talk across different points of 
view.”