James Adm1nistrat1on Bu1ld1ng 
Pavilion James de l'administrat on 
Tel./Tel.: 
+ I 514 398-4180 
845 Sherbrooke Street West 
845, rue Sherbrooke Ou est 
Fax/Téléc.: + I 514 398-4 7 68 
Montreal. Quebec, Canada H3A 0G4 
Montreal (Quebec) Canada H3A 0G4 
E-ma1l/Coumel: suzanne.fort1er mcg1ll ca
Let me state unequivocally that academic administrators enjoy the full protection of academic 
freedom in the pursuit of their scholarly activities. At the same time, they assume institutional 
administrative responsibilities with respect to both the University and the unit they lead. Although 
University officers may not interfere with the academic freedom of academic administrators and, 
moreover, have a duty to respect and protect it, they also have an obligation to ensure that 
administrative responsibilities are discharged effectively to the highest institutional standards, in 
a manner that pursues the academic mission and responsibilities of the unit that they are charged 
with overseeing.
Tensions or conflicts between the exercise of academic freedom by academic administrators and 
their obligation to execute their administrative responsibilities effectively are rare. So are tensions 
or conflicts between the University's duty to protect the academic freedom of academic 
administrators and its obligation to ensure effective execution of administrative responsibilities. 
None of these tensions or conflicts can be resolved through bright-line rules. Moreover, their 
resolution also depends on the nature, level, and category of the administrative responsibilities in 
question. Ultimately. it is a matter of judgment on the part of both academic administrators and 
senior university officers, acting carefully and with due regard for institutional neutrality and free 
mqmry. 
.../2
Dear Dr. Mercer,
Academic freedom is fundamental to any university. This is obviously true of McGill, whose 
mission statement affirms that "the principles of academic freedom, integrity, responsibility, 
equity, and inclusiveness" are critical to "the advancement of learning and the creation and 
dissemination of knowledge, by offering the best possible education, by carrying out research and 
scholarly activities judged to be excellent by the highest international standards, and by providing 
service to society."
Thank you very much for your letter of March 27, 2017.
Mark Mercer PhD 
President, Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) 
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre 
Halifax, Nova Scotia B3L 4T6
April 21, 2017
Office of the 
Bureau de la 
Principal and Vice-Chancellor 
principale et vice-chanceliere
Suzanne Fortier PhD 
Pnnc,po/ and V1ce-Chancellor 
Prmc,po/e et v1ce -chancelière
Professor of Chemistry 
Professeure de ch1m1e
c.c.: 
The Hon. Michael A. Meighen, CM QC, Chancellor, McGill University 
Professor Christopher Manfredi, Provost & Vice-Principal (Academic), McGill University
Professor Suzanne Fortier
Members of the scholarly community are not normally understood to be speaking on behalf of the 
University. 
However, when scholarly members of the community make statements in their 
capacity as academic administrators, ambiguity may arise as to whether their views do, in the 
absence of information to the contrary, represent those of the University. In those rare instances 
where such ambiguity arises, it may be necessary for either the academic administrator or the 
University to provide clarification. 
This was the intent of the message released via Twitter, but 
we recognize that it raised its own ambiguities about the University's commitment to academic 
freedom and the general norm that extramural statements by faculty members do not represent the 
views of the University. We regret this ambiguity.
When academic administrators 
no longer believe that they are able to discharge their 
administrative responsibilities effectively, then it is reasonable for them to step down from those 
responsibilities. 
Similarly, the University may, through the relevant institutional procedures 
appropriate for each case, replace academic administrators who are no longer able to discharge 
their responsibilities 
effectively. 
In either case, with the exception of a finding of serious 
misconduct, there is no impact on the academic administrator's 
status as a scholarly member of 
the university community.
I trust this provides the clarity that you were seeking in writing your letter.
Sincerely,