24 March 2021 
Jacques Frémont 
President and Vice-Chancellor 
University of Ottawa 
Tabaret Hall 
Ottawa ON K1N 6N5 
Dear President Frémont, 
I am writing as president of the Society for Academic Freedom and 
Scholarship (SAFS), an organization of university faculty members and 
others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and the merit principle 
in higher education. (For further information, see our website at 
SAFS commends you for standing for freedom of expression in the face of 
demands by politicians that the University of Ottawa sanction law professor 
Amir Attaran for his remarks about Quebec being led by a white 
supremacist government and for rejecting calls that Ottawa U apologize. 
You are right that “freedom of expression … is not a buffet where one can 
pick and choose what kind of speech is deemed acceptable or not.” It is 
important that professors and students be able to say what they wish, no 
matter how distasteful some find their views, if the university is to be a 
place of open and candid discussion and criticism. 
SAFS is concerned, nonetheless, that, according to a newspaper report, you stated that Ottawa 
U does not share Dr Attaran’s opinions. Associating your institution with a position on a 
matter of public concern can dampen discussion among members of the Ottawa U community. 
When a university takes a public stand, students and professors might not speak their minds out 
of respect for the institution or in fear of reprimand. 
SAFS is also concerned that you distinguished between postings on Twitter and utterances in a 
classroom, suggesting that if Dr Attaran had aired his view in class, sanctions might be 
warranted. Classrooms need to be places of freedom of expression if the are to be hospitable to 
robust critical discussion. 
Government leaders and others should not be calling on universities to sanction professors or 
seek to oversee and control discussion. You are to be commended for instructing those who
Board of Directors 
Mark Mercer, Ph.D. (Saint Mary’s) 
President 
Janice Fiamengo, Ph.D. (Ottawa) 
Andrew Irvine, Ph.D. (UBC) 
Steve Lupker, Ph.D. (Western) 
Clive Seligman, Ph.D. (Western) 
Peter Suedfeld, Ph.D. FRSC (UBC) 
Robert Thomas, MLIS (Regina) 
Frances Widdowson, Ph.D. (MRU) 
 Past Presidents 
Clive Seligman, Ph.D. (Western) 
Doreen Kimura, Ph.D. FRSC (SFU) 
John J. Furedy, Ph.D. (Toronto)
6593, rue Jeanne-Mance, Montréal, Québec, Canada; e-mail: 
demanded that Ottawa U discipline Dr Attaran on the nature of university values and 
procedures. 
We respectfully request that you respond to our letter. With your permission, we will post your 
response along with this letter on our website. 
Sincerely,
Mark Mercer, PhD 
President, Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) 
6593, rue Jeanne-Mance 
Montréal (Qc) H2V 4L1 
Facebook: 
Professor of Philosophy 
Halifax, NS B3H 3C3 
Cc: Stéphane Brutus, Dean, Telfer School of Management 
Victoria Barham, Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences 
Louis Barriault, Dean, Faculty of Science 
Richard Barwell, Dean, Faculty of Education 
Jacques Beauvais, Dean, Faculty of Engineering 
Adam Dodek, Dean, Faculty of Law, Common Law Section 
Jill Scott, Provost and Vice-President Academic Affairs 
Bernard Jasmin, Dean, Faculty of Medicine 
Kevin Kee, Dean, Faculty of Arts 
Marie-Eve Sylvestre, Dean, Faculty of Law, Civil Law Section 
Lucie Thibault, Dean, Faculty of Health Sciences