18 January 2017 
Michael J. Mahon, PhD 
President, University of Lethbridge 
4401 University Drive 
Lethbridge, AB T1K 3M4 
Dear Dr Mahon, 
I am writing as president of the Society for Academic Freedom and 
Scholarship (SAFS), a national organization of university faculty members 
and others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and reasoned and 
respectful debate. (For further information, please see our 
The Canadian Press reports that the University of Lethbridge has filed a 
complaint with the Alberta Human Rights Commission against Professor 
Anthony Hall for comments Dr Hall made on blogs and in videos 
Board of Directors 
Mark Mercer, PhD (Saint Mary’s) 
President 
Janice Fiamengo, PhD (UBC) 
Tom Flanagan, PhD, FRSC (Calgary) 
Andrew Irvine, Ph.D. (UBC) 
Steve Lupker, PhD (UWO) 
John Mueller, PhD (Calgary) 
Clive Seligman, PhD (UWO) 
Peter Suedfeld, PhD FRSC (UBC) 
 Past Presidents 
Clive Seligman, PhD (UWO) 
Doreen Kimura, PhD FRSC (SFU) 
John J. Furedy, PhD (Toronto)
It is disturbing that the University, Dr Hall’s employer, would complain to 
the AHRC. The University has its own disciplinary procedures, up to and 
including dismissal, that it can invoke, and in which Dr Hall would be 
represented by his union. Lodging a complaint seems to be an end run 
around the University’s own procedures. 
Further, it is disturbing that the University would launch a complaint based on the content of 
a professor’s speech. Doing so is contrary to respect for both freedom of expression and 
academic freedom. Universities should protect speech by its academic staff rather than try to 
curtail it.
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3L 4T6, Canada
In light of these considerations, SAFS would like to ask you how a human rights complaint 
against Dr Hall is consistent either with confidence in the University’s own procedures for 
dealing with alleged misconduct or with protection of academic freedom and freedom of 
expression. 
SAFS looks forward to hearing from you. We will post this letter on our website. With your 
permission, we will be pleased to post your reply together with it. 
Yours sincerely,
Mark Mercer, PhD 
President, Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) 
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre 
Halifax, NS B3L 4T6 
Professor and Chair, Department of Philosophy 
Saint Mary’s University 
923 Robie Street 
Halifax, NS B3H 3C3 
Cc: Kurt E. Schlachter, Chair, Board of Governors 
Anthony Hall 
Andrea Amelinckx, President, University of Lethbridge Faculty Association