6 October 2016 
Michael J. Mahon, PhD 
President, University of Lethbridge 
4401 University Drive 
Lethbridge, AB T1K 3M4 
Dear Dr Mahon, 
I am writing as president of the Society for Academic Freedom and 
Scholarship (SAFS), a national organization of university faculty members 
and others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and reasoned and 
respectful debate. (For further information, please see our 
According to a report today by the CBC 
, Professor Anthony Hall has been suspended from teaching and 
prohibited from entering your university’s campus. The report states that 
the University of Lethbridge is investigating Dr Hall for possible violations 
of the Human Rights Act. 
Suspending a professor is, as you know, an extreme form of discipline. It is 
difficult to see what in this case would warrant it. Dr Hall is not alleged to
Board of Directors 
Mark Mercer, PhD (Saint Mary’s) 
President 
Janice Fiamengo, PhD (UBC) 
Tom Flanagan, PhD, FRSC (Calgary) 
Andrew Irvine, Ph.D. (UBC) 
Steve Lupker, PhD (UWO) 
John Mueller, PhD (Calgary) 
Clive Seligman, PhD (UWO) 
Peter Suedfeld, PhD FRSC (UBC) 
 Past Presidents 
Clive Seligman, PhD (UWO) 
Doreen Kimura, PhD FRSC (SFU) 
John J. Furedy, PhD (Toronto)
be an incompetent or fraudulent researcher, nor an incompetent or abusive 
teacher. So far as the information that has been made public goes, he has 
been suspended for having and expressing views with which administrators 
disagree. Now even if administrators find his expressed views repugnant, 
academic freedom protects his rights to have them and to express them publicly. 
In light of these considerations, SAFS would like to ask you how Dr Hall’s suspension is not a 
violation of his academic freedom and how his suspension will not tend to create a chilly 
climate for expression on campus.
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3L 4T6, Canada
SAFS looks forward to hearing from you. We will post this letter on our website. With your 
permission, we will be pleased to post your reply together with it. 
Yours sincerely,
Mark Mercer, PhD 
President, Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) 
PO Box 33056 Quinpool Centre 
Halifax, NS B3L 4T6 
Professor and Chair, Department of Philosophy 
Saint Mary’s University 
923 Robie Street 
Halifax, NS B3H 3C3 
Cc: Kurt E. Schlachter, Chair, Board of Governors