Trudeau calls for end to 'Quebec 
bashing' after Ottawa professor says 
province run by 'white supremacist 
government'
The PQ asked for an apology from the university after recent remarks from Amir 
Attaran, whose Twitter posts have sparked numerous social media dust-ups
Author of the article:
The Canadian Press 
Christopher Reynolds 
Publishing date: 
Mar 22, 2021 • 15 hours ago • 2 minute read • 
642 Comments
University of Ottawa professor Amir Attaran. PHOTO BY JEAN LEVAC/POSTMEDIA/FILE
OTTAWA — Prime Minister Justin Trudeau says he’s fed up with “Quebec bashing” following 
controversial remarks from a University of Ottawa professor.
At a press conference announcing broadband internet funding Monday, Trudeau and Quebec 
Premier Francois Legault slammed online comments from law professor Amir Attaran, who 
claims the province is led by “a white supremacist government” and too tolerant of racism.
“Enough of the Quebec bashing,” Trudeau said in French.
“This is unacceptable,” Legault added in French, stating he was “disappointed” the university’s 
president opted not to condemn Attaran’s posts more vehemently.
University of Ottawa president Jacques Fremont said in a letter to Parti Quebecois Leader Paul 
Saint-Pierre Plamondon on Sunday that the institution does not share Attaran’s opinions, but that 
they were posted on his personal Twitter account and thus not subject to sanction, as comments 
uttered in the classroom might be.
“I deplore these kinds of highly polarizing statements made in public forums, particularly on 
social media. Along with others, I find it disturbing to see such a vindictive tone and personal 
attacks posted on Twitter and other platforms,” Fremont wrote.
“Nonetheless, freedom of expression, we will agree, is not a buffet where one can pick and 
choose what kind of speech is deemed acceptable or not.”
Plamondon had asked for an apology from the university following recent remarks from Attaran, 
whose provocative Twitter posts have sparked numerous social media dust-ups in recent days.
He has called Quebec’s culture racist, dubbing the province the “#AlabamaOfTheNorth” and 
accusing its nurses of “medical lynching” in regard to Joyce Echaquan, a 37-year-old Indigenous 
woman who died in a Quebec hospital in 2020.
“The nation of Quebec is led by a white supremacist government,” Attaran said in a Twitter post 
Sunday.
His scathing posts aren’t limited to a single province. Attaran also referred to the RCMP as the 
“Royal Canadian Mounted Pigs” in a recent post on an independent commission’s finding that 
Mounties dealt in a discriminatory manner with the family of Colten Boushie, a 22-year-old First 
Nations man who was fatally shot by Saskatchewan farmer Gerald Stanley.
“Accusing the nation of Quebec of being systematically racist, that is not, to most, a difficult 
proposition — although it has proven extremely difficult for Mr. Legault and his government,” 
Attaran said in an interview Monday.
“It merely means you treat whites as supreme. And Quebec undeniably does so, as when a 
government hospital advertises for ‘white women only,”‘ he said, referring to job postings for 
patient attendants at a hospital north of Montreal last fall.
Bloc Quebecois MP Alain Therrien joined the fray in the House of Commons on Monday, saying 
Attaran’s posts — and the university’s response — demonstrate Quebecers are a minority that 
remains subject to “hate speech without any consequences.”
“In Canada, Quebec-bashing is allowed and it may even pay off,” Therrien said, calling Attaran 
“ignorant” and a “francophobe.”
Attaran responded by calling the Bloc a “white supremacist party.”