
 
 

The University of Toronto’s Student Newspaper
!
Since 1880
Business
Arts &
Home
Campus
News
&
Labour
Features
Opinion
Science
Sports
PhotosIllustrationsVideo
Crosswords
Magazine
Culture
NEWS
1. U of T Law launches
Canada’s first
Animal Law
program under
direction of Professor
Angela Fernandez
2. What happened since
Ruth Marshall’s post
The Faculty of Law is facing allegations of interference in a hiring controversy. MICHAEL
PHOON/THE VARSITY
3. Blues fall to Bold for
first loss of the
season
U of T law students “deeply
concerned” by allegations of
judicial interference in hiring
4. How U of T
discrimination and
harassment
complaints were
resolved last year
5. Are international
Faculty denies allegations of employment being
rescinded, claims role was never offered
By Isabel Armiento — Published September 27, 2020
After recent allegations that the Faculty of Law allowed external judicial
pressure to influence its internal hiring process, many students involved
with the Faculty of Law’s International Human Rights Program (IHRP)
have expressed concern. The faculty, however, denies the allegations.
As reported in The Globe and Mail and the Toronto Star, the Faculty of
Law allegedly offered the position of director of the IHRP to Valentina
Azarova, a respected academic who has published criticism of Israel’s
policies in occupied Palestinian territories. Azarova told The Globe and
Mail that she had accepted an oral offer for the position.
The faculty is alleged to have later rescinded the offer due to pressure from
Justice David Spiro, a member of the Tax Court of Canada and U of T
alum. Spiro has been involved with the faculty’s past fundraising events,
and several of his family members are notable donors to the university.
The allegations were met with widespread condemnation, both at U of T
and globally. Law professor Audrey Macklin, the chair of the hiring
committee that recommended Azarova, resigned immediately upon hearing
the allegation of interference.
All three members of the program’s faculty advisory board resigned on
September 16, and Vincent Wong, one of the program’s two research
associates, resigned on September 17. According to The Globe and Mail,
these resignations were due to concerns about an unfair process, unclear
reasons for the faculty’s decision, and a lack of collegiality.
Human rights group Amnesty International threatened to terminate its four-
year partnership with the IHRP if the Faculty of Law didn’t offer
transparency and accountability in light of the allegations.
Dean Edward Iacobucci denied the allegations in an email to the faculty. He
wrote, “Assertions that outside influence affected the outcome of that
search are untrue and objectionable. University leadership and I would
never allow outside pressure to be a factor in a hiring decision.”
Iacobucci continued to assert that the accusation that he had offered and
rescinded the director position to Azarova was also false. Though the
faculty had been in communication with Azarova about the position,
ultimately “no offer of employment was made because of legal constraints
on cross-border hiring that meant that a candidate could not meet the
Faculty’s timing needs,” he wrote.
“Other considerations, including political views for and against any
candidate, or their scholarship, were and are irrelevant.”
Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice-President Human Resources and Equity, wrote
in an email that the allegations of interference are not true and noted that
some information about the situation has been published out of context.
Law students express concerns
On September 17, the U of T Students’ Law Society (SLS) published an
open letter in response to the “disturbing” allegations. “We are deeply
concerned about the allegations… which allege judicial interference with
the Faculty’s hiring process,” wrote the SLS in its open letter. “These
allegations suggest that… the Faculty has compromised its commitment to
academic freedom.”
Students involved with the IHRP are also troubled by the situation. “To say
the least, the allegations are quite disappointing and troubling,” Abdullah
Khan, a second-year Juris Doctor (JD) student, said in an interview with
The Varsity. “The IHRP has been an integral part of the law school. It’s one
of the reasons why scholars come to the Faculty of Law, because the
program is so well regarded and has a major impact.”
Khan worries that the allegations have put the program’s international
reputation in jeopardy and potentially compromised the IHRP’s ability to
do important human rights work. “It’s been allowed to do its work because
Kristen Kephalas, a fourth-year JD and global affairs student, expressed her
disappointment with the Faculty of Law. “Those of us who have been
involved with the IHRP as fellows and clinic students… have benefitted
from the IHRP in both tangible and intangible ways, from grant funding to
professional experience and mentoring,” she wrote to The Varsity in an
email. “It feels like a personal affront to hear allegations that the
administration would put the integrity of the program at risk to appease its
donors.”
“The allegations create reputational risk for the program, its partners, and
its projects and erode the efficacy of the IHRP as a legal advocacy group,”
Kephalas added. “As a law school there is an added obligation on the
administration to conduct itself ethically.”
Joshua Eisen, a third-year JD student, wrote to The Varsity in an email that
if the allegations of judicial interference are true, “the Faculty of Law has
compromised its commitment to academic freedom.” He also noted that the
reputation of the IHRP was central to his decision to come to U of T for law
school. “I find the willingness of the law school to essentially undermine
the IHRP for external political reasons deeply disturbing,” Eisen wrote.
Other concerns
For Eisen, the controversy also exposes more than just unethical hiring
practises.
“It points to a disturbing general tendency to clamp down on any criticism
of Israel, regardless of its legitimacy,” he wrote. “Dr. Azarova’s scholarship
on Israeli human rights abuses in the occupied Palestinan territories is
completely within the bounds of legitimate academic research; she is an
expert in International law and her work has appeared in various peer-
reviewed journals. While it may be politically unpalatable for some, her
work is not even particularly controversial.”
“By bowing to external pressure, the university is contributing to a climate
in which criticism of Israel is often suppressed, sometimes by couching it as
anti-Semitic,” Eisen added. “As a Jew I find this trend offensive.”
Eisen also expressed concern over the program’s future, as the director
position remains vacant. “From what I understand, the program has been
languishing without permanent leadership for some time now, and someone
like Dr. Azarova would have been a great fit,” he wrote.
Kephalas voiced a similar frustration. “This controversy highlights how
human rights as an area of law is undervalued by the Faculty,” she wrote.
“The program has already been without a permanent director for a year. If
this situation isn’t resolved, students who rely on the IHRP will lose out on
human rights education that is not offered anywhere else at the Faculty.”
Tags: Faculty of Law, law