Date(s) of occurrence: September 1968 - July 1969
Origins: During the summer of 1968 UNB decided to introduce identification
cards for the fall semester. Assistant professor of physics Norman Strax
believed this action to be an "erosion of civil liberties and democracy" and
gathered support from some student activists to stage a protest. On
September 20 Strax and two students, Clayton Burns and David Hallam,
attempted to check out library books at the Harriet Irving Library but
refused to show their ID cards. When the library refused to allow the men
to take out the books, they proceeded to inundate the circulation counter
with hundreds of books that day and on September 21 and 23. On
September 24 Strax was suspended from the university for his actions, and
in protest he and some student supporters moved into his office, room 130
of Loring Bailey Hall, on September 27. This room became known as
"Liberation 130" and was at the centre of numerous student demonstrations
on the UNB Fredericton campus.
Account of events: A court injunction sought by UNB president Colin B.
Mackay removed Strax from university property in early October, but the
students protestors remained, much to the displeasure of some other
groups of students. Campus support for the student activists of "Liberation
130" was mixed; while the bulk of the student population was characterized
as either "indifferent or open minded", there was a small group of
sympathizers as well as an equally sized group of students who were
demonstrably hostile to the activists. Numerous confrontations between
those members of Liberation 130 and other students took place on weekends, with (often drunk) students attempting to
forcibly remove the protestors. This led to the breaking of windows; ladders being placed against Bailey Hall to try and
access the room through a window; rocks, beer bottles, eggs, and garbage were thrown at and into the room, and even
mild tear gas was used. These students, often from the engineering, forestry, and business administration faculties, staged
an attack on Hallowe'en in which 200 people surrounded the outside of Liberation 130 throwing eggs and garbage,
shouting  obscenities, and breaking windows. Later that night a pipe burst in the room and flooded the rooms below,
destroying research documents.
Norman Strax, 1966. Acc. 2010.05; Series 1; no.
324, File 12.
The occupation finally ended, on November 10, when Fredericton City Police removed the protestors and sealed room
130. Charges were initially laid against the protestors, both students and non-students alike, but were later dropped
because the University's main goal had been to clear the room. In December, two students, Tom Murphy and John Oliver,
were charged with contempt of court for writing and publishing, respectively, an article which criticized Justice J. Paul
Barry's handling of Strax's case as well as the general New Brunswick court system. Oliver ended up writing a retraction
and paying a $50 fine, while Murphy wrote an apology and spent ten days in jail.
The Student Representative Council (SRC) originally planned to use student money to help the legal costs of Tom Murphy
and John Oliver, and the group passed a motion in late January 1969 to give financial aid to the two men, but the
opposition from the Engineering Undergraduate Society and Forestry Association forced the SRC to rescind the motion in
February. Meanwhile the Mobilization SDS resumed activities in January and planned a reoccupation of room 130, but
upon entering the room on February 18, activists were promptly removed by the City Police.
Parallel to the student protests during the fall of 1969 was the involvement
of the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT), a professional
organization of teaching faculty concerned with policies on hiring, firing
and the tenure of faculty. CAUT repeatedly expressed disapproval of the
manner in which Strax's case had been handled by UNB (especially
regarding the reasoning behind Strax's suspension), and they also
disapproved of UNB's refusal to create an arbitration committee to resolve
the dispute. After several attempts to persuade Mackay and the Board of
Governors to rescind their legal actions, CAUT officially censured UNB on
March 15, 1969. This meant that professors across Canada, the United
States, and Britain would be advised not to accept employment at UNB,
thus raising the potential for current faculty to seek employment
elsewhere.
Student demonstration over CAUT censure, 20
March 1969. UA PC-7 no. 20a (1).
The censure served to provide a point of unification for a previously divided student body at UNB. Five days later on
March 20, a student demonstration planned by the SRC, with help from the SDS, took place in front of the Old Arts
Building where a Board of Governors meeting was taking place; this demonstration was meant to show the concern of
students over the CAUT censure in the hopes that the Board of Governors would act to resolve the issue. More than 1000
students participated and a makeshift coffin, representing the Board of Governors, was burned in front of the Old Arts
Building to symbolize the end of the "old order." At a meeting with students that evening, Mackay related that the Board of
Governors were prepared to set up an arbitration hearing for Strax's case. This was effectively the end of the Strax Affair
for students at UNB. The CAUT censure was officially lifted July 18, 1969.
Note(s): Strax's employment contract with UNB officially ended June 30, 1969, and the injunction and damages against
Strax were dropped that summer. Strax remained in Fredericton for the next ten years and then left for a position at
Wabash College in Indiana, USA. He died in 2002.
Source(s):
Kent, Peter. Inventing Academic Freedom: The 1968 Strax Affair at the University of New Brunswick. Halifax, NS:
Formac Publishing Co., 2012. LC72.5.C3 K46 2012.
The Brunswickan (UA RG 84), vol. 102, 12 September 1968 - 21 March 1969.
Alumni News (UA RG 92), vol. 23, no. 3, Autumn 1969.
UA Case 173; Section 1, Box 2; Strax Affair.
Montague, Susan. A Pictorial History of the University of New Brunswick. Fredericton: University of New Brunswick,
1992, p. 191-193.
Main Page
Anniversaries
Brief History of UNB
Buildings
Faculties and Departments
Governance and Administrative Positions
Official University Events and Symbols
People of UNB
Plaques, Monuments and Structures
Prizes and Awards
Sports and Athletics
Student Clubs and Societies
Student Events and Escapades
University Publications
Women's Sports at UNB
 About UNB Archives and Special Collections
Prior arrangements must be made for the retrieval of this material. Please email us to make an appointment.
Contact Archives & Special Collections
Contact Archives & Special Collections
Contact Archives & Special Collections
Contact Archives & Special Collections