University of Lethbridge 
faculty group speaks 
out against prof's 
suspension
C P, T H E C A N A D I A N P R E S S 
More from CP, The Canadian Press
Published on: October 11, 2016 | Last Updated: October 11, 2016 4:36 PM MDT
University of Lethbridge professor Anthony Hall holds 'Earth Into Property' and 'The American Empire and the Fourth
World, two books he authored, while staying in the Occupy Calgary encampment at Olympic Plaza in downtown Calgary
on Friday, November 18, 2011. Hall has spent time at the Occupy London (England) and Vancouver camps. As it moved
into its second month, the Occupy Calgary camp was beginning to face a bad-weather test, with temperatures dipping to -
15 and colder temperatures forecasted. LYLE ASPINALL/CALGARY SUN/QMI AGENCY L Y L E
A S P I N A L L / L Y L E A S P I N A L L / C A L G A R Y S U N / Q M I A G 
SHAREADJUSTCOMMENTPRINT
LETHBRIDGE — The University of Lethbridge’s faculty association 
is speaking out against the suspension of a professor whose online 
comments about the Holocaust and Israel have angered Jewish 
groups.
Association president Andrea Amelinckx says the move violates provincial law and 
contravenes the contract between faculty and the university.
She says the contract sets out a process for investigating complaints in a fair, speedy and 
thorough fashion.
Jewish groups such as B’nai Brith Canada and the Centre for Israel and Jewish Affairs have 
commended the suspension of Anthony Hall, a tenured professor in liberal education and 
globalization studies.
The groups have cited online videos in which the professor suggests the events of the 
Holocaust should be open for debate and that there was a Zionist connection to the 9-11 
attacks.
The university said in a statement last week that Hall has been suspended without pay 
pending an internal review into possible violations of the Alberta Human Rights Act.
“The University of Lethbridge Faculty Association does not condone violations of the Alberta 
Human Rights Act in any form. We also protest the actions on the part of president 
(Michael) Mahon and the board in violation of the Post Secondary Learning Act,” Amelinckx 
said in an emailed statement Tuesday.
“We call on the board of governors of the University of Lethbridge to ensure that the 
allegations that have been made against professor Hall are investigated with the speed and 
thoroughness they deserve, using the legal and contractual procedures already in place in 
the Post Secondary Learning Act and the contract with the Faculty Association.”