In late March 2021, a controversy erupted at the University of Ottawa involving law professor Amir Attaran, whose provocative Twitter posts sparked widespread political condemnation and a public debate about academic freedom and institutional neutrality. The events began when Attaran posted on Twitter that “the nation of Quebec is led by a white supremacist government,” following a series of other inflammatory posts in which he called Quebec’s culture racist, dubbed the province the “#AlabamaOfTheNorth,” accused its nurses of “medical lynching” in connection with the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Indigenous woman who died in a Quebec hospital in 2020, and referred to the RCMP as the “Royal Canadian Mounted Pigs” in response to a commission’s finding of discriminatory treatment of the family of Colten Boushie.

These remarks drew immediate reactions from political figures. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, at a press conference announcing broadband internet funding, said he was fed up with “Quebec bashing,” stating in French, “Enough of the Quebec bashing.” Quebec Premier François Legault called the comments “unacceptable” and said he was “disappointed” that University of Ottawa president Jacques Frémont had not condemned Attaran’s posts more vehemently. Parti Québécois Leader Paul Saint-Pierre Plamondon formally asked the university to apologize for the professor’s remarks. Bloc Québécois MP Alain Therrien joined the fray in the House of Commons, arguing that Attaran’s posts and the university’s response demonstrate that Quebecers remain subject to “hate speech without any consequences,” while calling Attaran “ignorant” and a “francophobe.” Attaran responded by calling the Bloc a “white supremacist party.” In an interview, Attaran defended his statements, saying that “accusing the nation of Quebec of being systematically racist” is not a difficult proposition, and that his claim that the province treats whites as supreme was supported by examples such as a government hospital advertising for “white women only” for patient attendant positions.

In response to the political pressure, President Frémont wrote a letter to Plamondon on Sunday, March 21, 2021. In the letter, Frémont stated that the university does not share Attaran’s opinions, but that the comments were posted on his personal Twitter account and thus not subject to sanction. He drew a distinction between postings on Twitter and utterances in a classroom, suggesting that if Attaran had aired his view in class, sanctions might be warranted. Frémont wrote, “I deplore these kinds of highly polarizing statements made in public forums, particularly on social media. Along with others, I find it disturbing to see such a vindictive tone and personal attacks posted on Twitter and other platforms.” Nonetheless, he affirmed, “freedom of expression … is not a buffet where one can pick and choose what kind of speech is deemed acceptable or not.”

Following the publication of Frémont’s letter, the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), an organization of university faculty members and others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and the merit principle in higher education, sent a letter to Frémont dated March 24, 2021. The letter, signed by SAFS president Mark Mercer, commended Frémont for standing for freedom of expression in the face of demands by politicians that the University of Ottawa sanction Attaran and for rejecting calls that the university apologize. SAFS specifically endorsed Frémont’s statement that “freedom of expression … is not a buffet where one can pick and choose what kind of speech is deemed acceptable or not,” and affirmed that professors and students must be able to say what they wish, no matter how distasteful some find their views, if the university is to be a place of open and candid discussion and criticism.

However, SAFS expressed two principal concerns. First, according to a newspaper report, Frémont stated that Ottawa U does not share Dr. Attaran’s opinions. SAFS argued that associating the institution with a position on a matter of public concern can dampen discussion among members of the university community, as students and professors might not speak their minds out of respect for the institution or in fear of reprimand. Second, SAFS took issue with Frémont’s distinction between postings on Twitter and utterances in a classroom, suggesting that classroom speech might be sanctionable. SAFS asserted that classrooms need to be places of freedom of expression if they are to be hospitable to robust critical discussion. The letter also commended Frémont for instructing government leaders, who should not be calling on universities to sanction professors or seek to oversee and control discussion, on the nature of university values and procedures. SAFS respectfully requested a response from Frémont and asked permission to post his response along with the letter on its website. Copies of the letter were sent to the deans of several faculties at the University of Ottawa, including the Telfer School of Management, Social Sciences, Science, Education, Engineering, Law (Common Law and Civil Law sections), Medicine, Arts, and Health Sciences, as well as to the Provost and Vice-President Academic Affairs. The events as a whole illustrate the tensions between a university’s commitment to free expression, its desire not to be seen as endorsing controversial views, and external political pressures.