On June 8, 2020, Dr. David Lesbarrères, Dean of the Faculty of Graduate Studies at Laurentian University in Sudbury, Ontario, posted a tweet that triggered a major controversy. Lesbarrères, a French evolutionary ecologist and biologist who had been appointed dean for a five-year term in July 2016, was responding to a tweet from Peter Soroye, a Black PhD biology student at the University of Ottawa, who had described being on the receiving end of a racist comment. In his own tweet, Lesbarrères wrote: “And shockingly enough on our campuses, even white males receive racist comments about their past. Why can’t we all see that we were once a monkey, let alone bacteria?” He ended the post with the hashtag “#AllLivesMatters” (sic).

The tweet was quickly condemned by members of the Laurentian community. Some of Lesbarrères’s Twitter followers expressed hurt and anger, and as the tweet was reposted on social media, the reaction intensified. Many people viewed the hashtag #AllLivesMatter as a criticism of the Black Lives Matter movement, since it is often used by detractors of that movement. On June 9, Lesbarrères deleted the tweet and issued an apology on Twitter: “Last night, I issued a tweet that hurt many people. I apologize for my words and understand that I must educate myself further about #BlackLivesMatter and Tweeter (sic). I didn't know that # existed and now realize it is rooted in values I do not hold and that I strongly condemn.” He added: “I pledge to continue to educate myself, continue the fight for inclusivity and against racism, and I apologize to all people I have hurt.”

On the same day, Laurentian University president Dr. Robert Haché issued a statement on the university’s website. He said: “Yesterday, our Dean of Graduate Studies issued an inappropriate and offensive tweet. He has since apologized publicly for his comments which, by his own admission, have hurt many people in our Laurentian community and beyond. The University is following-up on this expeditiously and with the utmost care and attention.” Haché also wrote: “That said, I wish to reiterate that I condemn any racism on campus. Laurentian is a campus that does its utmost to ensure that we are safe and inclusive.” The statement listed resources available to students, staff and faculty, including counselling services, the Indigenous Sharing and Learning Centre, the keep.me.SAFE program for international students, the Employee and Family Assistance Program, and the Equity, Diversity and Human Rights Office.

Laurentian’s Graduate Students’ Association tweeted a call to action demanding that the school make the dean’s consequences public. Aaron St. Pierre, president of the Laurentian Graduate Student Association, said many graduate students were “deeply upset” by the comments. He said the association was happy that Laurentian had committed itself to addressing systemic racism and saw the dean stepping down as a step towards that. The association suggested that mandatory training be implemented for all Laurentian staff and increased funding for the Equity, Diversity, and Human Rights Department.

On June 22, Haché announced that Lesbarrères would be stepping down from his role. His statement read: “Further to my statement of June 9th condemning racism on campus, today I wish to communicate with the Laurentian community that Dr. David Lesbarrères will be stepping down from his day-to-day functions as Dean of the Faculty of Graduate Studies for an indeterminate period, effective immediately.” Interim arrangements for leadership of the Faculty of Graduate Studies were to be communicated shortly, with the functions of the Dean overseen by the Vice-President, Academic and Provost, Dr. Serge Demers. It was expected that Lesbarrères would return to his previous position as an assistant professor in the department of biology, although he had no scheduled classes that term. Laurentian confirmed that Lesbarrères remained a professor.

Following his departure, a number of colleagues, students, and outside organizations came to Lesbarrères’s defence. Jason Lepojarvi, an assistant professor of religious studies at Thorneloe University, described Lesbarrères as “a wonderful guy who has been mistreated” and a victim of cancel culture, defined as withdrawing support for people or businesses after they have done or said something considered objectionable or offensive. Guy Chamberland, chair of the department of ancient studies at Thorneloe, said he had studied Lesbarrères’s Twitter account dating back two years and found no evidence of racism. Mery Martinez Garcia, a biology professor originally from Colombia, said: “David is a biologist who believes all life matters. People know David is not a racist but they are afraid to speak out.” Charles Ramcharan, an assistant professor in the School of Environment, wrote a letter to the editor calling Lesbarrères’s suspension “a miscarriage of justice.” He said Lesbarrères had been “a strong voice for students who are black, Indigenous, and people of colour (BIPOC), an ally in the fight for equality, and a person in a position where his ideals and energies can be transformative.” Ramcharan noted that Lesbarrères had helped get Ontario Graduate Scholarships and Teaching Assistantships extended to international students, worked tirelessly to care for international students trapped during COVID-19, housed an Iranian student in his home, and helped a refugee student find safe shelter. Ramcharan compared the treatment of Lesbarrères to the French and Russian revolutions, saying: “In David’s case, we have put the wrong person on the guillotine.”

On September 3, 2020, three professors—Guy Chamberland, Mery Martinez Garcia, and Jason Lepojarvi—published an op-ed in The Sudbury Star arguing that Lesbarrères had been unfairly treated. They admitted the tweet was “terribly timed” and “poorly worded,” but said he had accidentally stepped on “a cultural landmine” by using a hashtag he did not understand. They called the reaction an example of “callout culture” or “cancel culture,” and wrote: “To go after innocent scapegoats like this comes across as a diversion, a mockery of justice, and is painfully divisive.” They also criticized the punishment as sending Lesbarrères on “administrative leave for cultural ‘re-education’ somewhere, we assume, in the Gulag.” They endorsed a student-led petition to have Lesbarrères reinstated as dean. The petition, started by students, gathered about 180 signatures from students and faculty. It stated that the reaction was unnecessary given Lesbarrères’s reputation for being inclusive and respectful, and that his apology was swift once he realized he had unintentionally used a hashtag that he did not know was racist in nature. The petition cited activities such as canoe expeditions and snowshoeing treks organized for international students.

Black Lives Matter Sudbury responded with disappointment to the op-ed. Co-chair Ra’anaa Brown, a recent Laurentian graduate, said the movement’s administrators were “deceived” and “disappointed” by the letter and the professors who signed it. She said: “It’s important that people in positions of authority know social justice issues. Maybe [David Lesbarrères] doesn’t know, but it’s important that he knows that saying All Lives Matter is a racism issue. It’s not correct at all.” Brown also said the reference to the Gulag in the op-ed diminished the experience of students who have experienced racism at Laurentian and elsewhere. She called on Laurentian to do more to create an environment where students feel protected, including creating scholarships to financially support racialized minority students.

On September 9, 2020, the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), an organization of university faculty members dedicated to the defence of academic freedom and the merit principle, wrote to President Haché urging that Lesbarrères be reinstated immediately. The letter, signed by SAFS president Mark Mercer, argued that Lesbarrères’s tweet “was not inappropriate in any way” and simply expressed shock at racist comments directed against white students while asking that we remember our common descent or common humanity. The letter said that those who disagree with the tweet are free to criticize it, and that no one is harmed by hearing a view they do not like. It warned that the treatment of Lesbarrères would create “a chilly climate on campus for expression and discussion” and make it difficult for Laurentian to recruit high-quality administrators. SAFS encouraged Laurentian to reinstate Lesbarrères, apologize for betraying academic values, and make a statement affirming freedom of expression on campus. The letter asked Haché to respond and requested permission to post the response on the SAFS website.

Laurentian University’s director of communications, Isabelle Bourgeault-Tasse, said the university could not comment on whether Lesbarrères might be returned to his role as dean, since it was a personnel matter. She said: “Laurentian University is committed to providing a safe, inclusive and welcoming environment for all of our students, faculty and staff in support of our bilingual and tri-cultural mandate.” She also noted that the Laurentian Senate had established a new committee on racism and discrimination in June, and that a working group was tasked with creating a safe physical space for Black, Indigenous, and people of colour on campus.