Thompson Rivers University (TRU) in Kamloops, B.C., suspended economics professor Derek Pyne for one year without pay or benefits on July 16, 2020, over a Facebook post he made on June 10, 2020. Pyne, who teaches in the School of Business and Economics, said the suspension was the second time TRU had disciplined him in connection with an academic freedom dispute. He said he was surprised by the university’s action. “I did not think that even TRU would be foolish enough to go after me for such an obvious issue of academic freedom, given how much bad publicity they generated when they attacked my academic freedom in the past.”

Pyne’s first suspension came in 2018, after he published research into so-called predatory journals. His paper, “The Rewards of Predatory Publications at a Small Business School,” was published by the University of Toronto Press Journal of Scholarly Publishing. In it, he claimed that more than half of the faculty members in the TRU department of Business and Economics had published papers in illegitimate journals to advance their careers. Pyne said he was banned from campus in May 2018 and suspended in July 2018. TRU’s then-interim president, Christine Bovis-Cnossen, said at the time that the discipline was not related to his research but that she could not comment further due to employment and privacy law. Pyne was reinstated in January 2019. A committee of investigation established by the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) concluded in November 2019 that TRU’s administration had breached Pyne’s academic freedom and his privacy. The committee found that TRU “appears to suffer a broad institutional weakness when it comes to understanding academic freedom,” and that the university failed to understand academic freedom beyond a “narrow application to support faculty members’ freedom to pursue what they expect to be fruitful avenues of research and publish their results.” The committee recommended that TRU review its human resources practices to ensure academic freedom was properly understood and protected. TRU did not participate in the investigation, saying CAUT did not have authority or jurisdiction to probe issues covered by the collective agreement.

The Facebook post that led to the latest suspension praised the Brock University Faculty Association (BUFA) for supporting Tomas Hudlicky, a chemistry professor at Brock University who had been at the centre of controversy. Hudlicky had written an essay in the chemistry journal Angewandte Chemie that criticized employment equity hiring and commented on skills transfer between “masters and apprentices.” The journal retracted the essay after backlash, and Brock University apologized, saying the essay did not reflect the university’s values. BUFA published a statement supporting academic freedom. In his June 10 Facebook post, Pyne wrote: “Some good news for a change. Unlike Thompson Rivers University Faculty Association, it seems that some university unions are not opposed to academic freedom. One can debate some of the details of the following statement but the bottom line is that it comes out in support of academic freedom, even when it goes against the university, and the union’s, positions.” In a comment, Pyne tagged the Federation of Post-Secondary Educators and several members of TRU’s Faculty Association (TRUFA). He also predicted that TRUFA members would “go running” to Larry Phillips, the executive director of human resources at TRU, to defend them. The post was shared three times.

According to Pyne, two complainants told TRU that being tagged in the post led to them losing sleep, and one claimed she needed time off work to recover. A union executive member and steward filed the harassment complaint. Pyne said he was called to a human resources meeting with Phillips, who read him a four-page letter from TRU president Brett Fairbairn. Pyne was told he had been suspended for one year with no pay and no benefits, and he was also cut off from his TRU email account, which he said contains information he requires. He said he did not have a last chance to access his work email.

TRU spokesperson Darshan Lindsay said the university could not provide specific information on personnel matters due to employment and privacy laws, but stated: “We want to be clear that matters involving Dr. Pyne are not about the exercise of academic freedom.” Lindsay added that TRU fully supports academic freedom, “including the ability to conduct independent research, freely communicate knowledge and the results of research and scholarship, and respectfully debate differences.” She also said it was “unlikely the university would suspend an employee for a single social media post,” and that employees have avenues for appeal through their union or the British Columbia Labour Relations Board. Fairbairn made the same points in a letter dated July 28, 2020, in response to an inquiry from the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS).

The SAFS, an organization dedicated to defending academic freedom and the merit principle in higher education, sent a letter to TRU on July 27, 2020. Mark Mercer, the society’s president and a philosophy professor at Saint Mary’s University, said Pyne’s suspension was “a serious violation of his academic freedom.” The letter argued that Pyne’s right to criticize both TRU and his faculty association is protected by Article 9.6 of the TRU Collective Agreement. Mercer also wrote that “providing people an opportunity to know what one is thinking cannot be a case of harassment, especially when the people Dr Pyne tagged on Facebook were union officials.” He said denying Pyne the use of his office, university email address, and other university resources would severely impede his work as a scholar, and demanded that TRU explain why its action was not an attack on academic standards and values.

Pyne said appealing his suspension through his union made little sense because it was a union executive member and steward who filed the complaint that led to his suspension. However, after the suspension, Pyne received correspondence from TRUFA, including a copy of a grievance that listed academic freedom as a ground. Pyne said TRUFA had previously opposed action on academic freedom grounds, and that if the union was serious about the new grievance, “it really will change things.” TRUFA was demanding that the suspension be rescinded and that Pyne be reinstated with full retroactive salary and benefits. A previous complaint Pyne filed with the BC Labour Relations Board had been dismissed in July 2019, and his appeal was denied; the board said it lacked jurisdiction under Section 12 of the province’s labour code to determine whether academic freedom rights had been violated, and that such rights were a matter for arbitration under the TRU-TRUFA collective agreement.

Pyne said he was unsure of his next steps and had asked several organizations for advice. He said universities need to respect academic freedom, stating: “I think that the public has a right to know how tax dollars are being misused by a public institution. More generally, I think academic freedom is essential for the advancement of knowledge.” He also said: “At some point, a line has to be drawn or academic freedom will only be a right on paper.”