A unified summary of the events:

At Laurentian University in Sudbury, Ontario, the Laurentian University Faculty Association (LUFA) has won an important legal battle regarding academic freedom, after a posthumous grievance over the removal of a long-time psychology professor from his first-year course.

Dr. Michael Persinger, a neuroscientist known worldwide for his research on the human brain, had taught at Laurentian University for more than four decades. In December 2015, two months into the course, he was abruptly removed from teaching a first-year psychology class after the university administration received a student complaint. The complaint concerned a “Statement of Understanding” that Persinger had asked students to sign before attending his lectures. According to reports, the form listed sample words that might be used during class, including profane language, offensive slang for genitalia, and homophobic slurs. Persinger told CTV News in 2016 that the form asked students to acknowledge that they might occasionally hear profanities during his lectures. He said he had been using the form for ten years without any previous issues. The university pulled him from the course, stating that asking students to sign such a form was against school policy.

Persinger explained that his teaching technique involved exposing students to all types of different words, including emotional, profane, and politically incorrect language, because such words influence how people make decisions and how they think. By using words in lectures that cause emotion, he said he could teach students about how emotion affects the brain’s rational processes. He described the statement as “a tremendous recruitment tool,” saying students enjoyed the fact that it said “restricted” on the top and that they could ask any question they wanted, no matter how politically incorrect. He also said he gave students the option to transfer to another section of the course if they did not like his methods.

In a statement, Laurentian University said it was committed to providing a safe and respectful workplace and learning environment. The school said the Statement of Understanding was not in compliance with Laurentian University policies. The chair of the psychology department took over teaching the year-long course pending an investigation. Robert Kerr, Laurentian’s vice-president academic and provost at the time, said the issue was not one of academic freedom, but rather that Persinger had asked students to sign a document as a precondition for taking his course, even though admission requirements should never be decided by a professor. Kerr also said that had the document not been brought to his attention by a student, he would not have been dealing with the issue.

The Laurentian University Faculty Association immediately filed a grievance on Persinger’s behalf, arguing that the school had violated the professor’s academic freedom. The union said academic freedom includes “freedom of teaching, research and discussion, no matter how controversial, without reprisal or censorship,” and that the discussion of controversial matters is important to foster independent thinking and expression. Persinger himself said the university had not told him whether he would be able to teach the course again, and he said he was trying to change the nature of university lectures from a boring professor “blathering away” to an integrative classroom where questions are encouraged and critical thinking is developed.

Dr. Persinger passed away in 2018 at the age of 73. The legal battle continued after his death, with the faculty association pursuing the grievance. On November 6, 2019, arbitrator Kevin Burkett rendered a consent award. The arbitrator concluded that the administration had violated the late professor’s rights. According to the arbitrator, “It was improper and contrary to the Collective Agreement for the University to have removed Dr. Persinger from teaching (…) and to have issued the related email (…) to students in that course and in doing so to have failed to consider Dr. Persinger’s academic freedom.” The decision also binds the administration to follow a proper consultative process going forward and prior to the removal of a professor from the classroom, including assessing the responsibilities and duties of academics and their right to a full and proper investigation. The university also agreed to “not publicly invite complaints against faculty members, and (…) never again utilize a stand alone telephone number for complaints.”

The November 2019 announcement was described as a “Victory for academic freedom.” The Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) Executive Director David Robinson said, “This is an important and precedent-setting award for academic staff across the country. Academic freedom is a necessary condition for the free pursuit of knowledge and understanding.” LUFA president Fabrice Colin said the association was pleased with the decision because it sends a strong signal to members, but called it a bittersweet victory because Dr. Persinger was no longer with them to enjoy the result. He noted that the university has agreed to award a yearly scholarship in Dr. Persinger’s name to celebrate his internationally recognized contributions to neurosciences and the field of psychology. Colin said Persinger was a staunch defender of academic freedom who also received prestigious awards for his teaching and research accomplishments. The university administration, during the mediation session, recognized that it was improper to remove Dr. Persinger from his classroom and that in doing so they failed to consider his academic freedoms. Colin said the association was quite satisfied with the outcome, but emphasized that it would have been a victory if Dr. Persinger had been present to enjoy the result.