The main story running through these documents is the academic freedom dispute involving Dr David Healy, a psychiatrist from the University of Wales, and the University of Toronto and its affiliated Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. In September 2000, Healy accepted the post of clinical director of the mood and anxiety disorders programme at CAMH and professor of psychiatry at the University of Toronto. After he delivered a lecture at the centre in November 2000 voicing criticisms of psychotropic drugs—including Prozac (fluoxetine), manufactured by Eli Lilly, which had donated funds to the centre—the offer of employment was abruptly rescinded. Healy stated that the day after the lecture, and perhaps as early as the evening of the lecture, his job offer had been effectively revoked. He and his supporters believed the rescindment was due to his remarks about the drugs. University and centre officials denied the decision had anything to do with academic freedom. Dr Paul Garfinkel of the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health said, "I explain it by saying there were so many factors that we came to feel this was not going to be the person for the job," adding that the factors were confidential. Jim Turk of the Association of University Teachers asked, "Is the University of Toronto saying we don't want to risk offending potential funders by having a scholar who asks certain questions?"

Healy subsequently launched a lawsuit against the university and the centre for $C9.4 million (£4.1m; $US6m; €6.6m), claiming violation of academic freedom and defamation as a scientist and physician. In a letter released on September 5 to University of Toronto president Robert Birgeneau, a group of internationally renowned psychiatrists and medical researchers accused the university and CAMH of violating academic freedom and said the treatment of Healy "is an affront to the standards of free speech and academic freedom." The letter warned that the affair was jeopardizing the university's reputation and called on the university and CAMH to restore Healy's offer of employment and to offer him an apology. CAUT president Tom Booth encouraged others concerned about academic freedom to add their names to the letter.

The dispute was resolved by a settlement announced in a joint statement on April 26. The university said the statement "underscores its support for free expression of critical views and acknowledges Dr. Healy's scholarship by confirming it will be appointing him as a visiting professor in the faculty of medicine." The centre's website carried a statement announcing Dr Healy's appointment as "the settlement of all litigation and other outstanding disputes." The joint statement also said: "Although Dr Healy believes that his clinical appointment was rescinded because of his November, 2000, speech, Dr Healy accepts assurances that pharmaceutical companies played no role" in rescinding either his clinical or academic appointment. Healy intended to continue to write and speak on issues concerning pharmaceutical companies, research and academic freedom. Newly-elected CAUT president Vic Catano described the settlement as "a complete vindication for Dr. Healy" and "a clear acknowledgement of the quality and integrity of Healy's scholarly work." Catano said he hoped the case would motivate the University of Toronto and all other universities in Canada to more vigorously defend the academic freedom of faculty appointed at university-affiliated teaching hospitals and research institutions. Healy's supporters regarded the visiting professorship as vindication.

The documents also contain reports on other medical and health policy matters. One report described the growing caseload of the General Medical Council. Nearly two thirds of professional conduct complaints languish for more than a year between committees because of an upsurge in the number of serious cases referred to the GMC. The GMC expanded the number of Professional Conduct Committee panels to six and almost doubled the number of days the committee sits, from 242 days in 2000 to 479 last year. The council also appointed a second firm of solicitors, with a third firm to be contracted soon. Chief executive Finlay Scott said increasingly vigilant trust chiefs and medical directors are causing a flood of serious fitness to practise cases. The GMC admitted that some fitness to practise complaints take over two years to deal with because the Professional Conduct Committee cannot keep up with the caseload. Fitness to practise figures showed that the committee heard only 35% of conduct cases within a year, compared with a target of 90% for cases referred by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee between 1 July 2000 and 31 December 2001. Two years earlier about 40 cases were in the professional conduct queue, compared with 240 cases at the time of the report, with a "very sharp" increase in waiting times. Scott attributed the increase to clinical governance and other management mechanisms for dealing with poor practice that "are having the effect of flushing out long-standing problems." Of 122 doctors referred to the council's health committee in 2001, more than half had problems involving alcohol either on its own or in association with drugs or mental conditions. The GMC paid nearly £1m in trustees' travel, accommodation, subsistence, and locum expenses during 2001, and trustees received £1.5m in attendance allowances, honorariums, and locum payments to related parties; former GMC president Donald Irvine received £169 393 in attendance allowances and honorariums.

Another report concerned Australia's detention policy for asylum seekers and refugees. A coalition of 30 groups, including medical colleges, nurses' groups, and the Australian Medical Association, called for sweeping changes to current policies. The report said the detention of thousands of asylum seekers, including hundreds of children, and the lack of services for thousands of others living in the community are causing serious health problems. It warned that the policies risk creating a generation of deeply troubled young people. The report noted that "Australia is now the only western nation that places all informal and undocumented asylum seekers in mandatory detention for unlimited periods of time" and warned that Australia is breaching its obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. A submission to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Inquiry into Children in Immigration Detention was made available on the Royal Australasian College of Physicians website.

Finally, a separate research item described a study of fast-tracked journal articles. The researchers identified six articles from each of two journals—the New England Journal of Medicine and the Lancet—that were prereleased on the journals' websites, and matched them with 12 control articles. Using a 10-point scale, 42 general internists rated the articles on importance, ease of applicability, and impact on health outcomes. The fast-tracked articles on average had slightly higher importance and applicability scores than the controls, but the differences were modest, and five of the 12 controls were considered to be of similar or greater importance than the fast-tracked ones. The authors concluded that "journals in some instances are not expediting the publication or release of important articles, and in other instances are selecting relatively less important articles for expedited publication… Journals now need to find ways to consistently rate the importance of every submitted article."