The University of British Columbia Faculty Association (UBCFA) grieved against the University of British Columbia after the university required Professor Mary Bryson to sign an individual contract transferring copyright ownership in course materials for a new online Master of Educational Technology (MET) program. An arbitrator, James E. Dorsey, Q.C., issued a 97-page award on February 18, 2004, finding in favour of the union and Dr. Bryson on all counts. The university appealed to the B.C. Labour Relations Board, which upheld the arbitrator’s ruling and rejected each of the university’s grounds of appeal.

The dispute arose in the context of faculty ownership of copyright in course materials. The arbitrator noted that, under the Copyright Act, an author is presumptively the first owner of copyright, but works made in the course of employment are owned by the employer in the absence of an agreement to the contrary. However, in the university context, it is accepted that academic authors have copyright ownership of their writings unless they agree to assign it. This is characterized as the “academic or teacher exception” to the presumption of first ownership in the employer, or as an implied agreement based on custom, tradition, and shared understanding. Ownership of copyright by academic authors is important to support, foster, and preserve academic freedom. UBC Policy #88 also recognizes that ownership of and intellectual property rights to “literary works” produced by those connected with the University are vested in the individuals involved.

The Master of Educational Technology program was a joint degree offered online with the Tec de Monterrey. It was the first degree offered entirely at a distance by UBC and was intended to be fully cost recoverable. Course development for the program was managed through the Distance Education and Technology (DET) unit, which used a team-based project management approach. Faculty members developing courses were asked to sign a “MET Letter of Agreement for the Production, Development and Delivery of an Online Course” that required them to assign copyright to the university. The agreement gave the university, acting in its discretion, the right to decide which materials contributed by an author would be used in the course, the right to use materials without attributing authorship, and the right to revise or modify materials without the author’s consent.

Dr. Bryson, a tenured professor in the Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology and Special Education, was assigned in May 2002 to develop the core course ETEC 512 Application of Learning Theories to Instruction as part of her regular teaching load. In September 2002, she first learned of the contract from Dr. Jim Gaskell, the MET Coordinator. She objected to the contract on grounds of academic freedom and the artificial distinction between author materials and course materials. She believed the contract reduced her role to providing content and gave the university undue control and a right of censorship. She refused to sign and was removed from the assignment. The UBCFA advised members not to sign individual contracts, taking the position that the university was required to bargain with the association as the sole bargaining agent.

The union filed grievances alleging that the university violated Article 3 of the Agreement on the Framework for Collective Bargaining by negotiating directly with bargaining unit members over terms and conditions of employment, and violated Articles 4 and 12 by removing Dr. Bryson because of her membership in and activities on behalf of the association. The arbitrator found that intellectual property rights, and specifically copyright, are terms and conditions of employment. Because of the importance of the expression of ideas to academic freedom and the presumptive first ownership of copyright in faculty, issues related to copyright are part of the core of the relationship between employer and employee. The arbitrator concluded that the scope of the union’s exclusive bargaining authority includes the right to negotiate about matters related to copyright ownership of bargaining unit employees in works made in the course of their employment. He found that the university negotiated directly with individual faculty members contrary to Article 3.

The arbitrator also found that Dr. Bryson was removed from the assignment given to her by her department head because she was insisting on doing this portion of her assigned teaching in accordance with the terms of the collective agreement. The decision to remove her was punishment for her refusal to agree to work under terms different from those in the collective agreement. The arbitrator held that every bargaining unit member has a right, and perhaps a responsibility, to ensure the university complies with the collective agreement, and that refusing to make private agreements to different conditions of employment is an activity on behalf of the bargaining agent. He found that Dr. Bryson was removed because of her membership in and activities on behalf of the Faculty Association, contrary to Article 4 of the Framework Agreement. As a remedy, the arbitrator ordered the university to assign Dr. Bryson, as part of her regular teaching load, the development and teaching of ETEC 531 with Dr. Petrina.

The university appealed the decision to the B.C. Labour Relations Board. The UBCFA was determined to see the arbitrator’s decision upheld. The labour board rejected each of the university’s grounds of appeal and upheld the arbitrator’s ruling. The UBCFA president described the original ruling as a landmark victory for academic freedom and faculty rights, and the CAUT president said the decision strengthens everyone’s academic freedom and intellectual property rights. The case was seen as part of a broader struggle against the “unbundling” and commoditization of teaching in online education, and as confirming that faculty, not administrators, determine the content and spirit of courses.