Simon Fraser University has acknowledged mistakes and expressed “sincere regret” to York University professor David Noble over the handling of his candidacy for the J.S. Woodsworth Chair in 2001. The apology was part of an out-of-court settlement reached between SFU and Noble, who was denied the appointment despite overwhelming support from the faculty. Noble said he was “pleased at the outcome” and that Simon Fraser recognized the consequences of its actions. No settlement terms were released, and Noble said he is prohibited from discussing the deal.

In the winter of 2000, the department of humanities at Simon Fraser University invited Professor David Noble to apply for the J.S. Woodsworth Chair, a permanent position recently created by agreement between the department and the dean of arts. The department appointed a search committee that eventually selected Noble as its first choice and ultimately recommended his appointment to the entire department. The department endorsed the search committee’s recommendation, initially by a vote of nine in favour with one abstention, and later approved forwarding Noble’s name to the dean of arts by a vote of seven in favour, one opposed, and two abstentions. The search committee generated a short list of four potential nominees, and Noble visited the campus for interviews between Jan. 11–14, 2001. During his visit, Noble asked whether Michael Stevenson, the newly appointed president of SFU, would have a role in the selection process, and noted that any involvement by President Stevenson would not bode well for his candidacy. There was also discussion of the recent faculty strike at York University, during which Noble was critical of Stevenson’s role in the negotiations while the latter was vice president academic at York.

Despite the department’s strong endorsement, senior officials from the dean of arts all the way up to the president became involved in trying to stop Noble’s appointment. Dean John Pierce was initially supportive, but one week after the search committee’s decision, he informed department chair Stephen Duguid that severe concerns had been raised at a Deans’ meeting about Noble’s “collegiality” and an accusation that he tended to attack individuals with whom he disagreed. Dean Pierce had heard from Dean Ron Marteniuk of applied sciences an allegation that Noble had behaved rudely at a conference on technology and distance education at SFU’s Harbour Centre, including allegedly shouting “Nuremberg, Nuremberg” and not allowing a speaker to finish. The committee of inquiry later found there was no foundation to these allegations; the alleged victim, Tom Calvert, said the exchange had been “heated” but civil and focused on issues, not personalities. President Stevenson told Dean Pierce there was need for a thorough background check on Noble’s style of interaction, and wrote an email to Vice President Academic John Waterhouse saying, “I touched base with John Pierce this afternoon. I would be glad to discuss in detail, but I’d avoid this appointment like the plague.”

Dean Pierce commissioned a private consultant, Libby Dybikowski of Provence Consulting, to do a due diligence check on Noble. The dean wanted to know how Noble would interact with people who took opposing views, particularly faculty members engaged in IT work, the business community, and the press, and wanted the chair to build bridges to other faculties and the external community, including business. When Dybikowski contacted Noble for permission to contact individuals he did not know, Noble refused, saying the individuals listed knew neither him nor his work, and that he could suggest others who would be more appropriate. After consulting with Dean Pierce, Dybikowski again contacted Noble, who informed her that his lawyer advised him not to cooperate further because of the unusual nature of the request. Dybikowski then contacted Noble’s named referees and submitted a confidential report to Dean Pierce on Feb. 7. The Provence Consulting report was overwhelmingly positive, with referees describing Noble as creative, multi-disciplinary, a gifted organizer, a good team player, a principled activist, a superb speaker, and an educator loved by his students.

On Feb. 20, 2001, Dean Pierce informed Dr. Duguid that he would not support Noble’s nomination. In a March 12 memorandum, Dean Pierce stated that given the high-profile nature of the position, in particular representing the university to the wider public and building bridges to other departments and faculties such as applied sciences, he had decided to proceed with further background checks or due diligence. He cited Noble’s refusal to give permission to talk to a number of current or former senior academic administrators at York University and one other academic from SFU. The department reconsidered and reaffirmed its choice of Noble on March 22, 2001, with a vote of seven in favour, one opposed, and two abstentions. Vice President Waterhouse did not support the department’s recommendation and submitted the file to the University Appointments Committee (UAC), raising concerns about equity, permission to nominate, documentation, and representing the university. The UAC returned the file to the department in May 2001 with instructions to supply additional information, including a fuller CV, a statement of interest, a statement of teaching ability, and employment equity documentation. Dean Pierce then proposed terminating the search and starting a new search in fall 2001, despite the UAC’s indication that the deficiencies could be supplied without major difficulty. The process was suspended.

President Stevenson later announced that he had appointed Lyman Robinson, a retired professor of law, to inquire into the search process. The Robinson report, delivered July 30, 2001, recommended lifting the suspension and allowing the department to respond to the UAC, but concluded that Noble’s academic freedom was not violated, reasoning in part that there was no employment relationship between Noble and Simon Fraser University. The department of humanities resumed the process, but support within the department had declined. In November 2001, the UAC returned the file again, concluding that the appointment recommendation failed to meet all the documentary requirements of the university’s appointment policies and recommending a new search. Noble requested a review, and a Special University Appointments Committee (SUAC) dismissed his appeal, finding no procedural irregularities, no bias on grounds of personal prejudice, and no discrimination contrary to the Human Rights Act of British Columbia. The SUAC characterized President Stevenson’s “plague email” as the expression of a personal opinion in an informal email exchange.

The Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) Academic Freedom and Tenure Committee had established a committee of inquiry, composed of the Hon. Howard Pawley and Professor Gordon Shrimpton. The committee issued a damning report in 2003, determining that interventions by SFU administrators, particularly the dean of applied arts and the university president, had violated Noble’s academic freedom. The committee found that administrators imposed unreasonable requirements that concerned Noble’s style of engaging with academics and institutions he criticized, and may even have raised concerns about his professional opinions on tele-learning and university-corporate relations. The committee identified specific violations: the imposition of a requirement to “represent the university,” which is inconsistent with freedom to criticize the university; penalizing Noble for exercising his legal rights as a citizen when he refused to allow additional background-check contacts; raising concerns about his research and publications on university-corporate relations and educational technology; and inquiries into his style of interaction and collegiality, which violated freedom of discussion. The committee found bias or reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the president and the dean of arts, and concluded that the appointment process failed to adhere to established academic practice and violated CAUT policies. It recommended that SFU acknowledge that the department of humanities conducted a fair and thorough process and offer Noble an appointment with tenure to the J.S. Woodsworth Chair. SFU officials disputed the report’s findings, saying the university’s appointment process had worked properly. Noble filed a lawsuit against SFU. The university ultimately reached an out-of-court settlement, issuing a statement recognizing that it made mistakes when applying its policies to Noble’s candidacy and acknowledging that the mistakes had a personal impact on him, while noting that the outcome of the candidacy, had the mistakes not been made, remains uncertain.