In late March 2020, Kathleen Lowrey, an associate professor of anthropology at the University of Alberta, was dismissed from her administrative role as the Department of Anthropology’s associate chair of undergraduate programs. Lowrey had held the position since the start of the 2019-20 academic year, with the appointment normally running three years. Her dismissal was the result of informal, anonymous complaints made by one or more students to the University’s Office of Safe Disclosure and Human Rights and to the Dean of Students, André Costopolous. The students alleged that Lowrey’s “gender critical” views on sex and gender made them feel “unsafe” and caused them “harm,” and that her presence in the role could drive students away from choosing anthropology as a major. Lowrey was told it did not matter whether the claims against her were true. She was not given specific charges, was not given a hearing, and the complainants were not identified.

Lowrey describes herself as a gender-critical feminist. Her core views include the positions that biological sex is real, that men cannot get pregnant, that lesbians don’t have penises, and that transgender identity should not trump biological sex for policy decisions. She had publicly expressed those views by publishing an article on the website Feminist Current, posting signs and material on her office door, and teaching a January 2020 course, “Anthropology of Women,” in which she told students on the first day that they would read material currently out of fashion in academia and that they did not have to agree with her. She said she believed none of the complaints came from students who actually took the class. Lowrey was also told she had discouraged students from organizing Pride events, a claim she denied, and which led her to conclude the complaints centred on her views.

When asked to resign, Lowrey refused, insisting that if the university wished to dismiss her from the service role it would need to put its reasons in writing. Dean of Arts Lesley Cormack subsequently sent her a letter on March 24, 2020, stating that she was no longer “effective” in the role and that “it is not in the best interests of the students or the university” for her to carry on. The letter did not specify how the university reached that conclusion. University spokesperson Hallie Brodie said Lowrey’s academic appointment as associate professor had not changed, cited privacy reasons for not commenting on the administrative role, and said the university had no further comment.

The case generated extensive commentary and controversy. Carolyn Sale, writing for the Centre for Free Expression blog at Ryerson University, argued that the University of Alberta was endorsing ideological conformity and that the process was akin to “McCarthyite” proceedings or ex officio proceedings during the English Reformation, in which accused heretics could be punished based on secret disclosures never made public. Sale contended that there is no such thing as a “safe” learning environment if “safe” means never encountering disagreeable views, and that academic freedom applies to all aspects of a professor’s work, conventionally defined as 40% teaching, 40% research, and 20% service. She also criticized the university’s concern that Lowrey’s views could have financial consequences for the department under a budget model where government funding follows students, and the university’s reasoning that not dismissing Lowrey would make students feel the university cared more about supporting the professor than about them.

Mark Mercer, president of the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship, wrote to Dean Cormack asking her to reinstate Lowrey, warning that removing her would discourage faculty from assuming service roles and could harm teaching and academic integrity. Peter Wood, president of the National Association of Scholars, later wrote a public open letter to Steve Patten, the new Dean of Arts, urging the university to reverse its decision. Wood called Lowrey’s view that humans are sexually binary a biological fact, and argued that removing her from her position communicated to faculty that responsible expression of accurate information would be punished if it irritated enough students or administrators. Columnists Lorne Gunter and Barbara Kay defended Lowrey’s freedom of expression even while disagreeing with her views, with Gunter calling the dismissal a “witch-hunt mentality” and Kay noting that Lowrey was concerned the university had taken the position that “saying you don’t think a person can change sex is a firing offence.”

Student and faculty reactions were divided. Elizabeth Sawchuk, a Banting postdoctoral fellow and adjunct professor, said she had no problem with Lowrey exploring gender and sexuality in scholarship, but found the images on Lowrey’s door offensive and not academically appropriate, and said they harmed trans and non-binary students and colleagues. Chris Beasley, president of the Organization of Arts Students and Interdisciplinary Studies, said the removal was a positive result for students and that campus must remain a safe space. Joel Agarwal, president of the U of A Students’ Union, said professors are guaranteed academic freedom but that it does not give them immunity from discipline for behaviour that would lead to discipline in any other workplace. An anonymous student said Lowrey’s social media posts on Spinster, where she welcomed students searching her feed for “hate speech,” made the student fear bringing concerns forward. Another anonymous student said Lowrey disrupted a student-led queer anthropology event with “anti-trans remarks” and argued directly with a trans man in the room. Lowrey said she had attended the event to listen, but felt she needed to speak up, remained polite and careful, and believed some faculty members did not like being confronted.

Lowrey herself published an essay in Quillette describing her journey from South American anthropology to gender-critical feminism, noting that a decade earlier she might have joined campaigns to cancel other academics. She said that during the 2019-20 academic year the University of Alberta introduced sweeping equity, diversity, and inclusion policies that she believed could be used to silence feminist women. She noted she was the only member of the university’s General Faculties Council to vote against the new EDI policy, which included a focus on gender at the expense of sex. She said the conflict was unavoidable because contemporary gender ideology requires active affirmation that men can become women and vice versa, and that refusing to assent is treated as doing active harm to trans-identified individuals. She expressed concern for non-tenured university employees and for students afraid to voice shared opinions.

A grievance was filed by Lowrey and the Association of Academic Staff of the University of Alberta, the academic staff union. The union alleged that the university breached the collective bargaining agreement by failing to uphold academic freedom and by exercising management rights in an unfair, unreasonable, inequitable, and non-arbitrary manner. An arbitrator sided with the university, finding that Lowrey was removed not because of her academic views but because she was a “protagonist in a dispute” that prevented her from effectively serving as associate chair. The Alberta Labour Relations Board upheld that decision. In November 2024, the Alberta Court of Appeal dismissed the union’s appeal, ruling that it raised no question of law. Justice Dawn Pentelechuk wrote that the arbitrator had drawn a rational and transparently articulated line between Lowrey’s academic views, which were not the basis for the university’s decision, and her suitability to carry out the role given the circumstances that had developed. The court said the union’s argument was largely a complaint about the interpretation and weight given to the evidence, not an identifiable legal error.

Throughout the controversy, Lowrey maintained that her dismissal from the service role was a violation of academic freedom. She said the university had taken the position that if a professor is not specifically covered by academic freedom, that person can be fired, which she called terrifying and horrible. She said the implications were dangerous because the debate over biological sex and gender identity is a live issue in Canadian democracy. Supporters of Lowrey argued that unorthodox or controversial views must be actively debated and never suppressed, and that universities must not become homes for orthodoxy or dogma. Critics argued that Lowrey’s methods of communicating her views, including her office door and social media posts, created an exclusionary and toxic environment and went beyond legitimate academic discussion.