Acadia University in Wolfville, Nova Scotia confirmed on September 7, 2018, that Rick Mehta, a tenured associate professor of psychology, had been dismissed. The firing took effect on August 31, 2018, following a formal investigation into complaints against him. Mehta had taught at Acadia for fifteen years, including large required courses such as Introductory Psychology and Research Design and Analysis, and had received teaching awards and positive student evaluations. He was also a self-styled firebrand for “academic free speech” who had stoked a national debate about free expression on campus by making controversial comments on social media and in the classroom.

Mehta was outspoken both on campus and online about a range of contentious issues, including decolonization, immigration, gender politics, and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. He came under fire for saying multiculturalism is a scam, denying the wage gap between men and women, and dismissing the Truth and Reconciliation Commission as a vehicle for “endless apologies and compensation.” On Twitter, he retweeted a post saying it was “statistically impossible for all Native children to have had a negative experience with residential schools.” His defenders called his voice an antidote to political correctness run amok, while critics said his polarizing comments attacked marginalized people and perpetuated harmful stereotypes. The acrimonious debate spurred a Halifax-based activist to launch a petition demanding his removal, while a counter-petition called for him to stay in the classroom as a beacon of freedom of expression.

The university launched an external three-month investigation overseen by Dalhousie University professor emeritus Wayne MacKay, as well as an internal inquiry conducted by Acadia’s Dean of Science, Jeff Hooper. University spokesman Scott Roberts said he was unable to comment or “provide any elaboration” on the dismissal because it was a confidential personnel matter, and called the MacKay report a “privileged document.” The Acadia University Faculty Association said it was informed of the firing on August 31 and has since filed for arbitration. “The termination of a tenured professor is very serious, and the faculty association has filed for arbitration while its senior grievance officer and legal counsel examine the administration’s disciplinary procedures and evidence,” the association said in a statement. Mehta continued to receive his $112,527 annual salary and benefits pending the outcome of the arbitration.

An eight-page letter written by Acadia’s Vice-President Academic, Heather Hemming, on August 3, 2018, delivered a detailed review of the school’s grounds for disciplinary action against Mehta. The letter cited eight categories of inappropriate conduct: unprofessional and non-collegial conduct directed at students, faculty, and administration, including creation of a poisoned work environment; breaches of privacy in relation to students and colleagues; creation of a poisoned, intolerant teaching environment, particularly regarding sensitive issues of gender and race; making inappropriate and potentially discriminatory comments towards women and vulnerable groups; personal harassment and bullying of students, faculty and other members of the university community; significant deviations from the academic syllabus and significant use of irrelevant non-academic sources in class, resulting in failure to teach required course material; damaging the reputation of the institution by attacking the university and colleagues on social media; and unwillingness to recognize the harmful effects of actions on students and faculty.

Hemming wrote that it was “reprehensible” that Mehta posted to a publicly available Dropbox account a recording of one of his classes in which a student disclosed her rape experience. “This action further demonstrates your disregard for the privacy rights of students and suggests you are more concerned with public online support than the interests of students,” she wrote. The letter also stated that Mehta’s conduct toward students and colleagues created a “poisoned” work and teaching environment and that many members of the psychology department had expressed genuine concern for their safety. It cited an example where Mehta told an Intro to Psychology class that sexual assault survivors are not victims and women are assaulted because they put themselves in dangerous environments. Quoting the MacKay report, Hemming wrote that Mehta made numerous discriminatory or harassing posts on social media. “Indigenous peoples, racialized minorities, women, sexual identity and gender expression, immigrants and multiculturalism are all targets,” she wrote. The letter said a significant amount of class time, in some classes 90 percent or more, was spent on topics irrelevant or not connected to the course syllabus, and that Mehta had failed to deliver the course Acadia contracted him to teach. It also said that concerns, cautions, and counselling about the “harmful effects” of his teaching, interactions, and social media use had been brought to his attention but had fallen on deaf ears. “You seem to be under the impression that your rights of ‘free speech’ and academic freedom trump all other obligations to the university and members of the university community,” Hemming wrote.

In the letter of dismissal given to Mehta at his dismissal hearing, President Peter Ricketts stated that he was firing Mehta on the basis of issues that “were wide ranging and include failure to fulfill academic responsibilities, unprofessional conduct, breach of privacy, and harassment and intimidation of students and other members of the University community.” After the dismissal, Ricketts responded to a letter from Mark Mercer, president of the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship, saying the action was not taken in response to Mehta’s legitimate exercise of free speech or academic freedom. “He was not dismissed for his views but rather for his conduct towards other members of faculty, staff, and students,” Ricketts wrote. Ricketts said Mehta had been provided access to hundreds of pages of material from both the internal and external reports, as well as a lengthy list of specific reasons supporting the decision to dismiss him.

Mehta disputed the university’s account. He said the university gave him “broad and unspecified reasons” and that the reports relied in part on anonymous submissions and lacked methodology. He said he was only offered limited time to review the MacKay and Hooper reports before being fired, and was not allowed to have copies unless he signed an agreement preventing him from distributing confidential information or retaliating against complainants, which he called a “gag order.” Mehta said he never discriminated against or harassed students or colleagues. “I have never done any of the acts that have been attributed to me,” he said. He said “perspectives are subjective” and that the complaints came from a small number of students, while larger numbers of other students thought it was refreshing that he was trying to get them to think critically. He said he offered concessions before being fired: to move offices away from colleagues who were uncomfortable around him, to teach different courses, and not to be Facebook friends with students while they were in his courses, but the university was not interested. Mehta said he had no regrets about his comments, actions, or teaching style. He believed the real reason for his dismissal was a “culture war” taking place in universities, and that he was fired because he spoke out against the university’s new mission of “committing to social justice.” He said the university was using harassment and discrimination policies to suppress his dissent.

Several outside voices weighed in. Mercer wrote in the Halifax Chronicle Herald that the three most troubling things about the firing were the secrecy surrounding Acadia’s decision, Acadia’s failure to address properly any valid complaint, and Acadia’s attack on freedom of expression on campus. Peter Wood, writing for the National Association of Scholars, described the firing as “How a Social Justice Mob Fired a Tenured Professor,” arguing that Mehta stood up for disinterested academic standards while Acadia rushed to a “social justice” agenda. In March, the Canadian Association of University Teachers appointed a committee to review how Acadia handled grievances against Mehta to determine whether his academic freedom had been breached or threatened. The Acadia University Faculty Association filed for arbitration, and Mehta said he was going into the arbitration process with resolve because the outcome would have national implications for academic freedom in Canada.