Students at Bishop’s University in Sherbrooke, Que., have alleged that sociology professor Dr. Cheryl Gosselin has used derogatory and discriminatory language in her classroom for years. Multiple students spoke to CTV News and to The Campus, the university’s independent student newspaper, describing incidents involving racist, homophobic and Islamophobic comments, slurs, stereotyping and dismissive responses when students raised concerns. The allegations prompted an internal university memo, a review of complaint processes, reassignment of Gosselin’s winter 2025 classes, and statements from Quebec’s Higher Education Ministry.

Sociology student Malik Kessouagni, who said he took three classes with Gosselin, alleged that she spoke about how Black women “react” and said she “didn’t really like Black women” while staring at a Black woman in the class. Kessouagni also alleged that Gosselin discussed the stereotype about Black men with large penises while staring at him and a friend, as they were the only Black people present. Marie-May Lamothe, another sociology student, said she witnessed discriminatory comments about the LGBTQIA2S+ community as recently as November 2024. She said Gosselin used the “F” slur in class, repeating it six or seven times, and that there was “an audible gasp from the classroom.” Lamothe also alleged that Gosselin misgendered non-binary authors, called Arab men sexist, argued that women who wear the hijab “slut shame” Caucasian women, and freely used the “N” word and the “F” slur when discussing readings or lectures about Black and LGBTQIA+ communities. The Campus’s investigation identified the class as a first-year Gender and Sociology course (SOC129) and the date as November 12, 2024. Students said Gosselin used the slur while quoting Joel Mittleman’s 2022 article, “Homophobic Bullying as Gender Policing: Population-Based Evidence,” which contains the uncensored slur, and then kept repeating it while asking questions like “what does this mean, f-g.” Students described the discomfort in the room, and Allister Coursol noted that “no one was answering.” Aaliyah Wilburn, a political science student, said she raised her hand to ask Gosselin to consider the repercussions of using such strong language, but felt dismissed: “She basically blew me off. Told me I was incorrect, and basically, she made me feel dumb for saying something.” Kessouagni recalled Gosselin’s defence: “It’s not a word that she uses on a daily basis.” He said, “Regardless of the fact if you use it on a daily basis or not, you still used it. Therefore, it’s still an issue and you do not want to hold yourself accountable.” Sociology student Rory Point-Du-Jour, who took a class with Gosselin in 2022, said Gosselin was “not really apologetic or regretful” and told students “you guys kind of just have to deal with it.”

Wilburn reported the incident to the university’s Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) department and later lodged a formal complaint against Gosselin. She said the EDI response felt like they were “trying to find reasons and excuses for why Cheryl was saying the things that she was saying” and argued that there is “no excuse” and that the university should “hold your teachers accountable.” The Campus reported that Wilburn had not received recent information on whether the complaint was still in process. Andrew Webster, Vice-Principal Academics and Research, said he could not comment on the status of the complaint because of Quebec and Canadian privacy laws, while adding that complaints are taken “very seriously.”

The students also described earlier complaints. Markayza Mitchell, a sociology student, told The Campus about an incident in winter 2023 when she raised concerns in Gosselin’s first-year Quebec Society course about the lack of Indigenous representation. According to Mitchell, Gosselin said she shouldn’t impose her perspective on the rest of the class and pointed to the door, telling her she could leave. Mitchell said she “didn’t feel respected at all” and later dropped the class, which affected her ability to graduate. Leana Ceresoli, who became Social Science Senator in May 2024, said she had been made aware of Gosselin’s controversy through informal complaints about separate undisclosed incidents in Gosselin’s 2023 Quebec Society course. Ceresoli relayed these concerns to Roser Rise, then Student Representative Council Vice-President of Academic Affairs, and Rise said she worked with Webster to create a more clearly defined structure for formal complaints. However, the students who complained informally did not wish to pursue the formal process. Ceresoli, who was a teaching assistant for Gosselin’s fall 2024 Gender and Society course, was not in class when the slur was allegedly used and said she was surprised students had not told her.

The Bishop’s University Students’ Representative Council (SRC) said it was not aware of any formal complaints against Gosselin and encouraged students to contact the Office of the Dean or another relevant administrative office to file a formal report. Bishop’s University initially said it “cannot comment, discuss or disclose any confidential or personal information” and that it holds “itself and its faculty and staff to the highest standards.” Communications manager Sonia Patenaude said the university acts swiftly if concerns are raised and follows due process. After the CTV News report was published, an internal memo signed by Principal Sébastien Lebel-Grenier and vice-principals was sent to students and staff. The memo recognized that members of the community might find the media report “challenging and emotionally straining.” It said complaints “should be discussed with the professor, the program chair, the dean, or the ombudsperson” and that reports or complaints would be treated confidentially and investigated fairly. The university said it would “be pursuing a conversation in Senate, starting at its Jan. 24 meeting, on ways to better communicate resources and processes available to students” and would “also be examining how our processes can be improved.” The memo also said universities are “places of learning through the free and open discussion of sometimes difficult or challenging subjects and ideas,” and that professors must pursue truth and disseminate knowledge responsibly within a “safe and respectful environment.” It lamented that its “internal processes are not sufficiently known or understood, or may be seen as insufficient.”

Quebec’s Higher Education Ministry called the allegations “worrying” in the first CTV article, with spokesperson Simon Savignac saying, “Discriminatory comments cannot be tolerated” and inviting students to lodge complaints through official channels. The ministry later said it was “shocked” by the allegations and in close communication with the university. During the January 24 Senate meeting, Webster proposed integrating a link to university resources into course syllabi to standardize communication, but the proposal turned into a debate on professorial autonomy and administrative overreach. Webster said the proposal would be revisited by the Academic Standing Admissions Policy committee and intended to be brought back to Senate.

Following the CTV report, Gosselin’s winter 2025 classes — Sociology of the Body (SOC219) and Quebec Society (SOC102) — were cancelled on January 14. On January 16, Gosselin taught both classes without acknowledging the article. The following week, the classes were taken over by Dr. Travis Smith from the sports studies department and Dr. David Webster from the history department. Gosselin did not respond to requests for comment; Andrew Webster said she had no wish to comment and preferred not to be contacted further. Students such as Lamothe continued to call for real consequences, saying Gosselin “needs to face a real repercussion and realize that this is an actual incident that means a lot.” The students also expressed concern that a white student might think, “OK, if my professor is saying this, I should be able to say it too,” and that derogatory terms used so freely in a classroom are “really appalling.”