Between March 2011 and July 2012, the University of Calgary (U of C) worked to secure a sponsorship from Enbridge, a Calgary-based oil and gas pipeline company, to establish a research institute at the Haskayne School of Business (HSB). Dr. Joe Arvai, a recently appointed faculty member, was asked to be director of what became the Enbridge Centre for Corporate Sustainability (ECCS). The sponsorship agreement, dated July 1, 2011, was between Enbridge and “The Governors of the University of Calgary,” committing $225,000 annually over ten years. However, planned activities were based on an annual budget of $500,000, more than double Enbridge’s financial outlay, creating an immediate funding shortfall that was supposed to be made up by additional corporate fundraising.

During the establishment and launch of the ECCS, Arvai repeatedly raised concerns about Enbridge’s influence over the Centre’s academic mission. Emails disclosed through freedom of information requests showed that Enbridge exerted influence over the Centre’s name, the selection of partner institutions, the planning of the public launch, and the role of the director. Enbridge pressed for Central Michigan University (CMU) as a partner, in part because CMU had given Enbridge "very valuable advice" after the 2010 Kalamazoo River oil spill in Michigan; Arvai objected on academic grounds, saying CMU had only one faculty member in the relevant field, but was pressured to accept. HSB Dean Len Waverman told Arvai that “the monies we give to CMU are tiny – it won’t be viewed as a payoff,” and that “Elizabeth [Cannon] will have a fit if she sees this.” Enbridge also expressed concerns about Arvai’s appointment to a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Scientific Advisory Board, and the university delayed its announcement of that appointment so as not to “piss off Enbridge any more.” Arvai stated that “we cannot maintain our credibility as serious scholars/researchers if the sponsors can dictate the Centre’s agenda,” and that he could not serve as director if sponsors were allowed to meddle in academic activities.

Arvai was removed as ECCS director in March 2012. He later told the CAUT committee that he was removed one week after he informed Enbridge’s public relations firm, National Public Relations, of his opposition on scientific grounds to the Northern Gateway pipeline. In an email of March 19, 2012, Dean Waverman told Enbridge officials: “Joe Arvai is no longer Director of the Centre, there are too many conflicts and demands!” Arvai subsequently left the U of C and is now at the University of Michigan.

A CBC News investigation in November 2015 prompted the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) to establish an Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee. In his first public statement, an opinion piece reprinted by CBC News, Arvai said the CBC had done “an exceptional job of getting the facts correct,” and that the post hoc suggestions that decisions setting up the Enbridge Centre were “transparent, legitimate, and free of corporate interference or conflict-of-interest” were as difficult for him to accept as they were in 2012. He said donors should be able to suggest, but not select, advisory individuals, and should have a voice in a centre’s name and mission, but should not require that support be limited to those sharing their “core values.”

The CAUT report, released in October 2017, made findings on conflict of interest, academic freedom, external influence, funding, governance, and the McMahon review. It found a “clear appearance of a conflict of interest” on the part of U of C President Elizabeth Cannon, who served on the Enbridge Income Fund Holdings Board for significant remuneration while president, and who failed to publicly recuse herself from Enbridge-related matters. The report found that Cannon intervened directly with Dean Waverman, telling him that Enbridge was “not very happy,” that she wanted a good relationship with Enbridge, and emphasizing “I am on one of their Boards!” The report also found that the U of C Board of Governors failed to review or approve the sponsorship agreement, despite being a party to it, and that Cannon’s reliance on an “administrative lapse” was an “unacceptable evasion of responsibility.”

The CAUT committee concluded that Dr. Arvai’s academic freedom was compromised as a result of the U of C’s mishandling of the Enbridge Centre, appearing to be due to a desire on the part of senior leadership to please a significant donor. It found that Enbridge sought to influence the Centre’s establishment and launch, and that university administrators failed to convey that this influence was inappropriate. The report found that Enbridge was given special access to academic staff, was allowed to recommend partners, and had extensive influence over the public launch. The committee found Arvai’s explanation for his departure credible and troubling. It also found that the sponsorship was “skewed in Enbridge’s favour” from the start, with unfunded promises made at the university’s risk and expense, creating a “cycle of dependency” and pressures to compromise academic integrity. It identified a “significant failure of collegial governance, accountability and oversight,” and warned of “worrying signs of a culture of silencing and reprisal at the U of C.”

The CAUT report was highly critical of the university’s own review, led by retired Justice Terrence McMahon. The Board of Governors had commissioned the McMahon review in November 2015; McMahon found no wrongdoing and cleared university officials, including President Cannon, and the board considered the matter closed. The CAUT committee, however, stated that it was misleading to describe the McMahon review as “independent” and “transparent,” because it was established, mandated, and staffed by the Board or its counsel, and because it did not acknowledge or discuss the central role of academic freedom. The committee said McMahon gave the benefit of the doubt to senior officials while subjecting Arvai and Waverman to damaging criticism, and that the review’s selective approach to confidentiality was inconsistent with fairness and thoroughness. The CAUT report made recommendations including prohibiting university presidents and senior officials from serving for remuneration on external corporate boards, reviewing Board governance, and releasing all documents provided to the McMahon review.

Following the CAUT report, the University of Calgary Faculty Association, chaired by Sandra Hoenle, called on the provincial government to probe governance at the university. Hoenle wrote that one of the greatest concerns was “the domination of the senior administration in the governance processes,” and that the Board of Governors and Senior Administration had misapplied “for-profit corporate structures within a university collegial setting,” keeping decision-making behind closed doors. She said, “We’re not a corporation. Universities are not corporations.” Arvai welcomed the CAUT report and said it was “wholly appropriate for the faculty association to be asking for a provincial review.” Alberta’s Ministry of Advanced Education stated that conflict of interest was being examined at public boards, including academic freedom, through a review of agencies, boards, and commissions, and that “Academic freedom is a cornerstone of any university.” Hoenle said the provincial governance review had been truncated and should be expanded to specifically deal with issues identified in the CAUT and CBC investigations.