According to the CAUT Ad Hoc Investigatory Committee Report, in 2001 Professor George Nader was denied reappointment as principal or “master” of Peter Robinson College at Trent University. The search committee had recommended him by a six-one plurality, with two abstentions, and he had stated his willingness to serve. The denial followed a period of controversy during which the survival of Peter Robinson College was in question. On November 12, 1999, Trent’s board of governors agreed to President Bonnie Patterson’s proposal that her administration be authorized to close or relocate Peter Robinson College and Traill College, the university’s two downtown colleges. Opponents believed the closures would undermine Trent’s historic mission, and the Trent University Faculty Association shared that view.

Nader, then principal of Peter Robinson College and a tenured faculty member in geography, was centrally important in discussions of the administration’s plans. He criticized the policy of the Trent administration through letters and memoranda to university officials, contributions to senate and board proceedings, open letters to the board, organization of a society devoted to the college’s survival, communications with the press, and public utterances. He also forwarded motions passed by the Peter Robinson College Council, including a motion calling for the college to continue in its traditional downtown location. He produced a “Business Analysis” arguing that closure made little sense even on a strict cost-benefit basis. He became a trustee of the “Friends of Trent Colleges,” an association that raised funds for legal action against the board. Along with others, he acquired support from the senate, faculty association, students, staff, and members of the public. Nader also worked to ensure a judicial review once the closure decision was ratified by the board.

In late 2000, President Patterson and Vice-President Graham Taylor reprimanded Nader for his activities as a public critic of administration policy. Taylor’s letter of September 21, 2000 charged that Nader was conflating his academic role with his administrative role as an appointee of the Board of Governors, and that he was making statements to the public media, purportedly as Principal, that “must be recognized as detrimental to the well-being of the university.” Taylor objected to Nader’s use of his title in fund-raising for the Friends of Trent Colleges, to his use of college facilities, to his distribution of an open letter using a confidential list of board members’ addresses, and to his release of financial data and calculations that had been prepared on a confidential basis. President Patterson’s letter of October 26, 2000 reiterated the administration’s concerns and stated that Nader’s intervention had “not been fully constructive.” She also mentioned the upcoming college head search and expressed hope that Nader would fulfil his role as expected during transition issues.

Despite the reprimands, the search committee for a new principal recommended Nader’s reappointment. On April 24, 2001, the chair of the search committee welcomed news that Nader was prepared to accept a two-year reappointment. On May 6, 2001, Vice-President Taylor wrote to the committee chair that he did not think this was an appropriate recommendation and asked the committee to consider its options more thoroughly. According to Nader’s notes of a June 26, 2001 meeting with the president and vice-president, President Patterson offered three reasons for denying reappointment: Nader’s opposition in published reports and public statements to the board’s capital development plan; his role as trustee of the Friends of Trent Colleges; and her belief that students and faculty were divided on relocation, and that therefore the college should be relocated. She noted that the chair of the board agreed with her. Nader’s term ended June 30, 2001, and he returned to full-time academic work in the geography department.

The faculty association launched an unsuccessful grievance on Nader’s behalf relying on the collective agreement clause on academic freedom, but the grievance was not pursued because Nader had not been a member of the faculty association at the time of the claimed abridgement. A judicial review application seeking to quash the board’s resolution was denied by the Divisional Court; the Ontario Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal in Kulchyski v. Trent University, and the Supreme Court of Canada refused leave to appeal. Peter Robinson College was eventually closed, some of its operations moved to the main campus, and Sadleir House was sold.

In October 2003, CAUT’s Academic Freedom and Tenure Committee appointed an ad hoc investigatory committee, composed of William Bruneau and Timothy Quigley, to investigate whether there were breaches of or threats to academic freedom. The committee had access to substantial documentation and interviewed ten individuals on February 8 and 9, 2005. President Patterson declined to participate and instructed her administration not to participate; former Vice-President Taylor also declined to be interviewed. The committee concluded there was a prima facie case that Nader’s academic freedom had been abridged.

The committee found that Nader was a tenured academic holding an academic teaching appointment, and that his work as principal of his college was academic in scope and purpose. The position was an academic appointment by the senate, akin to a department head, and carried a responsibility to advocate on behalf of the college. The committee found no evidence that Nader’s public utterances materially threatened the administration’s ability to make or execute policy. Nader did not rely on secret materials, betrayed no administration secrets, and told the public nothing that a determined member of the public could not have found out for herself. The committee found no evidence that Trent funds were misdirected to the Friends of Trent Colleges, and no evidence that Nader was denied reappointment for just cause.

The committee concluded that Nader’s academic freedom was infringed by the administration’s reprimands in 2000 and by the subsequent and consequent refusal to reappoint him as principal. It rejected the argument that a frank criticism of administration policy “must be recognized as detrimental to the well-being of the university,” noting that administrative embarrassment is not the same as harm to the university. The committee also argued that academic freedom is not divisible according to type of duties, and that mid-level academic administrators such as a college principal, department chair, or associate dean should have the right to criticize policy without fear of reprimand or punitive changes in their conditions of employment. It stated that even more senior administrators should enjoy academic freedom protection for good-faith criticism, subject to legitimate constraints. The committee recommended that CAUT and AUCC study and develop a policy on academic freedom protection for senior university personnel, and recommended that the university administration apologize to Nader for infringing his academic freedom.