# Summary: Suspension and Termination of Dr. Francis Christian

Dr. Francis Christian, a clinical professor of general surgery at the University of Saskatchewan (USask) and a practicing surgeon in Saskatoon with more than 20 years of experience, was suspended and terminated from his positions after publicly raising concerns about COVID-19 vaccination of children. As of June 2021, Christian served as Director of the Surgical Humanities Program (which he co-founded), Director of Quality and Patient Safety in the Department of Surgery, and Editor of the Journal of the Surgical Humanities. His roles overlapped with a contract position with the Saskatchewan Health Authority (SHA).

On June 17, 2021, Christian released a prepared statement to over 200 doctors and spoke at a press conference outside Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon, appearing with a group called Concerned Parents Saskatchewan while a vaccine clinic was taking place at the high school. He declined to take questions from journalists. In his statement, Christian emphasized that he is a "very pro-vaccine physician" and is "pro-vaccine for my own family, including myself," citing the elimination of smallpox through vaccination. He stated he spoke "directly to parents and children" as "a physician, a surgeon and a fellow human being" and did not represent any group, the SHA, or the university.

Christian invoked the "sacrosanct principle" of informed consent, arguing that patients must be made "fully aware of the risks of the medical intervention, the benefits of the intervention and if any alternatives exist to the intervention," particularly for "a new vaccine that has never before been tried in humans." He asserted this principle was "being consistently violated in this province for the m-RNA vaccine for our kids," claiming he had not met "a single vaccinated child or parent who has been adequately informed."

Christian articulated eight points he argued parents and children must know before consenting: (1) that the mRNA vaccine is "a new, experimental vaccine design" never used in humans; (2) that the vaccines have not been fully authorized by Health Canada or the CDC, being under "interim authorization" in Canada and "emergency use authorization" in the US; (3) that while there is an emergency for the elderly, vulnerable, and health care workers—given that the mean age of COVID-19 deaths in Canada is 83.8—"Covid-19 does not pose a threat to our kids," with a death risk of less than 0.003%; (4) that children do not readily transmit the virus to adults; (5) that the mRNA vaccines have been "associated with several thousand deaths" in the US government's Vaccine Adverse Reporting System, which he called "a strong signal" that could not be ignored; (6) that there is a "real and significantly increased risk" of myocarditis (heart inflammation) in vaccinated children, leading the German national vaccine agency and the UK vaccine agency to not recommend the vaccine for healthy children; (7) that the benefit of the vaccine for children is "marginal at best," with an Absolute Risk Reduction of less than 2%; and (8) that Ivermectin is an alternative treatment. He urged authorities "to call a pause in the m-RNA vaccine roll-out to our kids" and stated that without informed consent, "the Nuremberg code is being violated." He also appeared in a video posted to the website BitChute that received nearly 70,000 views, in which he questioned the mainstream narrative about the pandemic, mocked restrictions, and called the vaccines "experimental injections."

On June 21, 2021, the Saskatchewan Health Authority and the College of Medicine wrote to Christian alleging they had "received information that you are engaging in activities designed to discourage and prevent children and adolescents from receiving Covid-19 vaccination contrary to the recommendations and pandemic-response efforts of Saskatchewan and Canadian public health authorities."

On June 23, 2021, Christian was called into a meeting with Dr. Preston Smith, Dean of the College of Medicine; Dr. Susan Shaw, Chief Medical Officer of the Saskatchewan Health Authority; and Dr. Brian Ulmer, Head of the Department of Surgery. He was informed of his immediate suspension from all faculty responsibilities and academic administrative roles, and that he would be fired from the university as of September 2021. The SHA terminated its contract with Christian, which was set to expire on September 21 following the required 90 days' notice. Christian remained able to practice medicine and the university said it was not suspending payment for services he would have otherwise received during the investigation period. Christian recorded the 22-minute meeting and posted the audio online.

During the meeting, Christian said, "You've basically read indictments against me. These are the sort of panels that were set up in the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany against academics," adding, "I'm not saying that you're Nazis or Soviets, but it's really disturbing, isn't it?" He stated he was one of many doctors being "silenced and censored," and told the officials, "You guys are living in a dystopian bubble. The truth will come out and when that bubble bursts, you guys are going to be in big trouble." Shaw expressed concern that Christian was "a highly intelligent man" who was "not making intelligent decisions," and Christian was offered supports if he was feeling distressed, which he declined.

In a statement, Dean Smith said the University "encourages public debate of important societal issues," but noted that per USask's Medical Faculty Policy, "our medical faculty are subject to the ethical and professional standards governing the practice of medicine." Smith told Global News that "when somebody is saying things that are at such great variance with all of our experts and worldwide experts and public safety is involved and could be jeopardized through these differences of view, I think we have to recognize that that's a special situation that requires urgent and extraordinary action." The SHA stated that "health system leaders are expected to be committed to fact-based, scientifically driven public messaging" and that leaders who depart "in favour of conspiracy theories put lives at risk by potentially discouraging uptake on life-saving vaccines."

The Justice Centre for Constitutional Freedoms announced it was representing Christian in his appeals and before the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, against a complaint objecting to his advocacy for informed consent. Litigation Director Jay Cameron said the termination was "a violation of his charter-protected right to freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, and a betrayal of the principles of scientific inquiry," and described "a clear pattern of highly competent and skilled medical doctors in very esteemed positions being taken down and censored or even fired, for practicing proper science and medicine." The Justice Centre also drew comparisons to its representation of Dr. Chris Milburn in Nova Scotia, who faced disciplinary proceedings over an opinion column.

On June 30, 2021, the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), through its president Mark Mercer, wrote to Dean Smith requesting an explanation of "how Dr Christian's suspension is not a violation of his academic freedom and how his suspension will not tend to create a chilly climate for expression on campus." SAFS argued that "nothing that has been reported should draw any discipline at all" and that "academic freedom protects his rights to have them and to express them publicly," noting the importance of professors being "free to question received wisdom and official policy" during a pandemic.