On 30 March 2020, Mark Mercer, PhD, President of the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), wrote to Leslie Phillmore, PhD, Acting Associate Dean (Academic) of the Faculty of Science at Dalhousie University, expressing concern about Dalhousie’s decision of 19 March 2020 to remove Gábor Lukács as instructor from his section of Math 1115. SAFS is described as an organization of university faculty members and others dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and the merit principle in higher education.

SAFS offered three grounds for concern. First, the decision appeared inconsistent with the principle that professors of courses are well positioned to make sound and fair pedagogical decisions. According to the letter, professors are granted a large sphere of freedom in teaching their courses in part because being close to their students enables them to find effective ways to teach in the specific circumstances of their classrooms. Dr. Lukács judged that once the course was moved online, fairness and student motivation required abandoning the standard grading scheme in favour of Pass/Fail. SAFS argued that a professor’s informed and conscientious decision should not be overruled unless that decision clearly puts something important at serious risk. The letter also stated that it was far from clear that, in the context of online teaching and evaluation, the Pass/Fail system would have been in any way unfair to students. Indeed, the system Dr. Lukács intended to use was very close to the new grade options announced by Teri Balser, Dalhousie’s Provost, on 26 March. Those options, in turn, were informed by recent thinking about how best to promote learning and respect the integrity of academic standards under conditions of social distancing and online teaching and evaluating.

Second, SAFS stated that Dr. Lukács was removed from his course despite the fact that he was actively seeking a resolution to the conflict over his grading decision. He had been ordered to reinstall his previous grading system and was given a very short deadline by which to comply; that deadline passed while he was discussing the matter with the Program Director. SAFS argued that the deadline could have been extended until Dr. Lukács was in a proper position to respond, and that in any case an arrangement for assigning grades could have been found that would have left Dr. Lukács the teacher in the course. The letter further suggested that Dalhousie’s unwillingness to wait until a professor had consulted with relevant officers would seem to put at risk collegial relations between the university’s administration and its professors. It also questioned why Dr. Lukács was forbidden from having contact with his students, stating that this order could serve no pedagogical purpose.

Third, SAFS argued that students in the class would be distracted and puzzled by the change of instructors and would have to get used to a new teaching style. Removing Dr. Lukács could not, therefore, have been in the best interests of the students. Continuity and consistency were described as always pedagogically valuable, but more valuable than ever under the present challenging circumstances. The letter concluded that if the decision to remove Dr. Lukács stood, Dalhousie would appear to have done a disservice to respect for informed and conscientious teaching decisions, to Dr. Lukács himself, to relations between the administration and professors, and to the students in Dr. Lukács’s section of Math 1115. SAFS respectfully requested a response and asked permission to post the response along with the letter on its website.

The letter was copied to Deep Saini, President of Dalhousie University; Teri Balser, Provost and Vice-President Academic; Jeannette Janssen, Chair of the Department of Mathematics and Statistics; and Gábor Lukács, Department of Mathematics and Statistics.

On 31 March 2020, Leslie Phillmore, PhD, Associate Dean Academic (Acting) of the Faculty of Science, responded to Dr. Mercer. In her response, Dr. Phillmore stated that she could not comment on decisions made with respect to individual employees, but assured him that Dalhousie University recognizes the importance of maintaining academic freedom in teaching, research and scholarship. She also stated that Dr. Mercer was welcome to post the response on the SAFS website. The response was copied to the same recipients as the SAFS letter: Deep Saini, Teri Balser, Jeannette Janssen, and Gábor Lukács.

The correspondence as a whole documents a dispute at Dalhousie University concerning the removal of a faculty member from a course after he changed the grading scheme to Pass/Fail following the move to online teaching. SAFS defended the professor’s pedagogical judgment, criticized the timing and manner of the removal, and emphasized the potential harm to students. Dalhousie’s response declined to comment on the individual personnel decision while affirming the university’s general commitment to academic freedom.