A chemistry professor at the University of British Columbia (UBC), Dr. John Sherman, came under investigation after making comments about race and IQ during a lecture. The comments occurred on January 19, 2022, during a break in his CHEM 313 class, when Sherman was discussing the semantics of calling something a "fact" or "racist." According to a video of the lecture posted on YouTube and a transcript posted to the UBC subreddit, Sherman told the class that "Black people do poorer on IQ tests than white people" and that "Asians do better than white people on IQ tests." He then questioned whether it was racist to ask whether Asian people are smarter than white people or whether white people are smarter than Black people based on those statements. He described the statements as "a historical fact" and said, "So it is grey... I think, what's racist and what's not." Sherman also said people can "get into a long debate" over whether the differences in IQ test scores are due to "genetics" or "environment," but maintained that his comments were facts. In the video, he is seen reading Zoom chat comments, including one from a student saying "are you serious?" and another suggesting that the topic was not the most productive for an organic chemistry class, after which he said "Okay we'll move on."

The incident prompted significant reaction. A student in the class posted about the remarks on Reddit, and another student posted a transcript of the exchange. The Ubyssey, UBC's student newspaper, reported on January 24, 2022, that Sherman was under investigation. The article noted that the comments were made during a discussion of semantics, with Sherman saying, "Do you ever know what anyone means when they say someone is racist? … It can mean all kinds of things." The article also cited research questioning the reliability of IQ tests and the genetic basis of test-score gaps, noting that a 2012 paper in *Education Economics* found that genetic make-up cannot explain how the score gap "changes fast and even moves in opposite directions depending on grades," and a 2012 study in *American Psychologist* found that IQ tests cannot measure other forms of intelligence such as emotional or social intelligence.

The Reddit thread about the incident featured a wide range of student and community responses. Some commenters criticized Sherman, with one saying he had previously had a bad experience with him and switched sections, and another describing him as "a huge jerk" outside of class. Others said that while the topic was inappropriate for an organic chemistry class, the comments themselves were not necessarily grounds for punishment if the statistics were accurate. One student, identifying themselves as a CHEM 313 student, said the posted transcript was "kind of misleading" because some of the Zoom chat was between students, not between the student and the professor. According to that student, one student's "are you serious?" was actually directed at another student's comment about statistics not necessarily implying causation, and after a back-and-forth in the chat, Sherman said, "Yes, we all agree on that." The student also noted that the discussion arose from Sherman discussing the word "racist" as an example of shifting semantics. Another commenter mentioned that in a sociology course, the history of IQ tests is discussed as being developed by white supremacist racists and not considered legitimate because of their origins. There were also lighthearted comments about CHEM 233 and CHEM 313 course averages going "bullish" and "to the moon," as well as comments about the professor being replaced.

UBC officials responded to the controversy. Matthew Ramsey, director of university affairs at UBC Media Relations, said in a statement to The Ubyssey: "While we cannot comment on the specifics of human resources matters, the university takes matters such as this very seriously and has a variety of measures and policies in place with which to address them." A January 27 update in The Ubyssey reported that, according to emails sent to students in CHEM 313 and Science One, Sherman had been replaced as the instructor for both courses and was on "indefinite leave." UBC confirmed that an email was sent to students in CHEM 313 informing them of the instructor change, but referred The Ubyssey back to its earlier statement when asked whether Sherman was on "indefinite leave." Professor Gregory Dake was listed as teaching Sherman's CHEM 313 section, according to a screenshot of the class's Piazza page and the SSC (Student Service Centre). The Ubyssey reported that it did not hear back from Sherman in time for publishing.

The controversy also drew attention from an academic freedom organization. On January 27, 2022, Mark Mercer, PhD, president of the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), wrote a letter to UBC President Santa Ono. In the letter, Mercer defended Sherman, stating that the video shows Sherman "says nothing that should draw the attention of UBC administrators." Mercer argued that Sherman was engaging in legitimate discussion about "the shifting meaning of the word 'racism'" and whether making claims about correlations between race and intellectual ability would "call down charges of racism." The letter said these are "perfectly legitimate topics to discuss with students" and that Sherman asked his questions "conversationally and in the spirit of inquiry." Mercer questioned whether UBC was investigating Sherman for making racist comments, saying, "Clearly, he didn't, except that, as he speculated, just about anything can be deemed racist." He warned that removing Sherman from his class and beginning an investigation sends a message that professors and students "may not raise certain topics or express certain views," which would have a "deleterious effect on research, teaching and campus life at the University of British Columbia." Mercer also asked whether Sherman was being investigated under a "respectful-campus policy," and argued that all policies guiding discussions need to be "topic neutral in their application." He requested a response from UBC and said SAFS would post the response along with the letter on its website. The letter was copied to UBC's Provost, the Dean of Science, the Dean of Applied Science, a Senior Advisor to the Provost on Academic Freedom, the president of the UBC Faculty Association, and Sherman himself.

In summary, the events involve a UBC chemistry professor's in-class remarks about race and IQ, the subsequent student and institutional response, the professor's removal from teaching duties pending an investigation, and a defense of his academic freedom by an outside scholarly organization.