Patrick Provost, a professor at Université Laval in Quebec, became the subject of academic-freedom controversy after making public comments critical of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines. According to a June 30, 2022 article by The Canadian Press, Provost, a professor of microbiology and immunology who studies micro RNA — small molecules that help regulate genes — was suspended for eight weeks without pay on June 14, 2022. The suspension stemmed from comments he made in December 2021 at a conference organized by Reinfo Covid Quebec, a group that has criticized COVID-19 public health measures and been accused of spreading misinformation about vaccines. At that conference, Provost said he believed the risks of COVID-19 vaccination in children outweigh the benefits because of potential side-effects from mRNA vaccines, which use messenger RNA created in a lab to teach cells how to make a protein. Following the conference, Provost sent an email to all professors at Université Laval encouraging them to share their knowledge and expertise with the public, referencing his December speech. That email led to a complaint from a colleague. A university committee consisting of a lawyer and two experts concluded that his comments were biased and that he did not analyze his data rigorously or present his information objectively.

Provost defended his actions, saying, "I was just doing what I was hired to do. I had some concerns about something, I searched the literature and I prepared a speech, delivered it to the public. Being censored for doing what I've been trained to do — and hired to do — well, it's hard to believe." He also said, "As soon as you raise some concerns about vaccines, or side-effects, or complications related to vaccines, then it's worse than the N-word. You're condemned by the media, by the government and you're chased and put down." He added that because he expressed opinions that went against the government narrative, he was suspended.

Simon Viviers, vice-president of the Université Laval faculty union, said the union had filed a grievance over the suspension. "For us, this is an attack on academic freedom," he said. "To allow (a university) to judge the validity of the comments made by a university professor in public and to sanction him in this manner is extremely problematic." Viviers said the university should not have used a research integrity committee to judge whether Provost's comments were valid. The union did not take a position on the comments themselves, only on how Provost was treated. Viviers worried that the suspension could have a dissuasive effect, "even lead to self-censorship."

David Robinson, executive director of the Canadian Association of University Teachers, said professors should be disciplined only for comments that amount to incompetence or that violate legal limits to speech, such as libel laws. "We have to have a high tolerance for academic freedom and diversity of viewpoints," he said. He added that "naysayers" and "gadflies" need to be tolerated because they sometimes turn out to be right. Robinson cited the example of researchers who first suggested that some ulcers are caused by bacterial infection — they were dismissed by the scientific community, but the evidence eventually proved them correct. "That's what the university is all about — it's all about disagreements and it's through disagreements and debate, and challenging evidence that's presented by someone else that we eventually reach some common understanding," he said. "But we shouldn't stifle that debate."

However, Dr. Mathieu Nadeau-Vallée, a medical resident at Université de Montréal with a PhD in immunology, said Provost is not an expert in the mRNA technology used in the Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines, or in the vaccination of children. "This person doesn't really have the expertise to speak about all this," Nadeau-Vallée said. "He's a biochemistry professor; he doesn't study messenger RNA, he studies small RNA. It's not at all the same area of research. So this is a person who is expressing themselves about a subject that they're not really an expert in and is speaking against the scientific consensus on that subject." Nadeau-Vallée said COVID-19 vaccines and public health measures have saved lives and that academic freedom means being able to speak about any subject but does not mean that false things can be said. He said anyone who wants to speak against the scientific consensus has to show scientific evidence.

According to local news reports, Provost was one of two professors suspended by Université Laval for anti-vaccine comments. The university declined to comment on either suspension, the union said it was not aware of the second case, and the second professor named in news reports did not respond to requests for comment. Quebec Higher Education Minister Danielle McCann said in an emailed statement that the suspensions were examples justifying the government's adoption earlier that month of a bill protecting academic freedom. The bill gave all universities in the province one year to create an academic freedom policy and establish a committee responsible for supervising its implementation. McCann said she was calling on Université Laval — and the province's other universities — to establish those policies as soon as possible. "These situations demonstrate the relevance and importance of adopting this law," she said.

A later letter dated June 4, 2024, from the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS) addressed the ongoing case. The letter was sent by Robert G. Thomas, President of SAFS, to Dr. Sophie D’Amours, Rector of Université Laval, at 2325, rue de l'Université, Québec. The letter expressed concerns regarding the "recent firing" of Professor Patrick Provost at Université Laval. According to multiple media reports, as stated in the letter, Provost had been disciplined, suspended and more recently fired for his public criticisms around the use of mRNA COVID vaccines. SAFS wrote that this turn of events was regrettable not only for what it did to interfere with Provost's academic freedom but also because of its potential effect on the wider community. The letter argued that academic institutions maintain public trust through their disinterested search for truth and openness to scholarly critique, and that if ultimate conclusions appear preordained and certain orthodoxies may not be questioned, universities could rightly be seen as places of dogma rather than empirical investigation. SAFS stated that firing Provost sent a clear message to researchers to tread carefully when entering certain debates, creating a chill on the expression of heterodox positions, particularly in science, and impeding the discovery of new understandings. The organization respectfully requested a response from the Rector and said it would post the response along with the letter on its website. The letter was copied to Hon. Pascale Déry, MNA, Minister of Higher Education, and Marie-Hélène Parizeau, President of SPUL.