In late spring 2019, Ricardo Duchesne, a tenured sociology professor at the University of New Brunswick’s Saint John campus, became the centre of a controversy over academic freedom, racism, and the limits of acceptable speech. On 18 May 2019, HuffPost published an article by Nick Robins-Early titled “The White Supremacist Professor Teaching At A Public University.” The article asserted that Duchesne, who had taught at UNB since 1995 and held a PhD from York University, was “also a white supremacist.” It claimed his writings were “filled with racist conspiracy theories,” that he was a frequent contributor to the white nationalist website Council of European Canadians, and that he had appeared on white nationalist podcasts, including with former Toronto mayoral candidate and Rebel Media host Faith Goldy. The article further alleged that Duchesne had claimed there was a “systematic rape of white women” by immigrants, that his talks were celebrated by neo-Nazis, and that his most recent book was released by a publisher whose list included “fringe racists, as well as Adolf Eichmann.” It quoted Evan Balgord, executive director of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network, as saying, “We consider Duchesne to be part of the alt-right neo-Nazi movement.”

The HuffPost article followed a 2015 controversy in which Kerry Jang, a psychiatry professor at the University of British Columbia, had filed a formal complaint about Duchesne’s blog posts on Asian immigration, and ten members of UNB’s sociology department had issued an open letter rejecting his views. At that time, UNB had defended Duchesne’s academic freedom. After the 2019 article, UNB President and Vice-Chancellor Eddy Campbell issued a statement saying, “UNB is reviewing allegations with respect to one of our faculty members. We take these allegations very seriously.” Two days later, recently appointed UNB Vice-President Petra Hauf wrote to the university community that UNB “unequivocally condemn[s] racism and misogyny, and do[es] not support the dissemination of any kind of hate speech, or ideas that promote or inspire hatred,” and that the university had “zero tolerance for racism and discrimination of any kind.” She added, “Please be assured that silence does not mean inactivity.” Global News reported that UNB was reviewing complaints about Duchesne’s comments and appearances with accused white nationalists, and that the review could lead to a formal investigation.

On 23 May 2019, 25 UNB faculty members, including more than ten historians, issued a public open letter condemning Duchesne’s “views about multiculturalism and immigration as racist and without academic merit.” The letter stated, “Cloaking these views in academic legitimacy is an abuse of his status as a professor at UNB,” and said the signatories were “deeply concerned about the negative impact that his polemics may have on all students in his courses, and especially Indigenous and racialized students.” The list later grew to more than 100 signatories across 26 programs. Gary Waite, a UNB history professor who signed the letter, said, “We are … trying to make it very clear that racism has no place in academia. It is not a part of scholarship. It is not just another controversial idea. It is just wrong.” Matthew Sears, a classics professor, said many colleagues were disappointed that the university had not taken a firmer stand, and had previously tweeted that white supremacists should be named, fired, and “hound[ed] from restaurants.” The Canadian Historical Association, led by president Adele Perry, issued a statement sharing the signatories’ concerns and distinguishing between academic freedom and “indefensible and potentially dangerous arguments.” It noted that Duchesne’s ideas on immigration and multiculturalism had not been published in peer-reviewed or otherwise rigorous publications, and pointed to the CHA’s own brochures on the history of immigration, ethnicity, and race in Canada.

Duchesne rejected the criticism. In a written response, he said, “It is rather rich for the academics who signed this letter to claim that the ‘hallmark of academic freedom’ is to subject views to criticism while at the same time seeking to deny my right to criticize the mandated ideology of diversity and mass immigration.” He noted that he was “an immigrant born in Puerto Rico with a mixed-race background,” that none of the signatories had scholarly background in Canadian immigration or multiculturalism, and that his book *Canada in Decay: Mass Immigration, Diversity, and the Ethnocide of Euro-Canadians* had been an Amazon bestseller. He described the HuffPost accusation as “lies, misquotations and defamatory claims.” The Canadian Association of University Teachers’ executive director, David Robinson, said academic freedom must be given “a broad and liberal interpretation,” but “that doesn’t mean it’s without boundaries,” citing professional ethics, disciplinary standards, and rules prohibiting discrimination. He said the question was whether there was evidence that Duchesne’s extramural comments made him incompetent to teach, and that this “requires a thorough and rigorous investigation based on principles of due process and natural justice,” adding, “We don’t want to end up in a trial by social media.”

Several commentators defended Duchesne. Mark Mercer, president of the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship, wrote to President Campbell on 29 May that academic freedom protects professors from institutional sanction for holding and expressing views “however unpopular or misguided,” and that investigating Duchesne for his views or venues was inconsistent with academic freedom. Mercer warned that investigating professors for what they say “cannot but have negative effects on the research and learning culture of UNB” and could erode public trust in university research. David Solway, writing for PJ Media and later C2C Journal, called Duchesne “one of the important scholars and thinkers of our day” and described his treatment as an “academic lynch mob” and a “vendetta.” Kenneth Westhues, professor emeritus at the University of Waterloo, wrote to the original signatories accusing them of “academic mobbing,” which he defined as “an impassioned social movement bent on eliminating some target from campus,” and later published an analysis calling the affair “a textbook case of academic mobbing” and “a metaphorical auto da fé.”

On 4 June 2019, UNB announced that Duchesne had provided notice of his early retirement, effective at the end of the month, “to focus on his own pursuits as an independent scholar.” Vice-President Hauf said, “We respectfully accept his decision and thank him for his 24 years of service.” Duchesne said he planned to write about “why European civilization was far more creative than all the other civilizations combined,” “why all European-created nations are being forced to diversify themselves through mass immigration,” and “why the mainstream media never allows any critical thinking about the mandated ideology of diversity.” Gary Waite said he and his colleagues were pleased Duchesne was leaving, contending that his views “have no place in academia.” Westhues noted that the outcome—the target’s ostensibly voluntary exit—was the most common result in mobbing cases he had studied, and compared Duchesne’s case to that of sociologist E. A. Ross, who was forced out of Stanford University in 1900 for his anti-immigration views, a case that later inspired the founding of the American Association of University Professors. Westhues described Duchesne’s case as one of “lateral or collegial mobbing,” in which the hostility came from peers rather than senior administration.