St. Lawrence College, an Ontario institution with campuses in Brockville, Cornwall, and Kingston, announced that it no longer employs business professor Rick Coupland following an internal investigation into a complaint about homophobic comments allegedly posted on his Facebook account. The college's spokeswoman, Kelly Wiley, stated that the comments constituted a “breach” of the school’s code of conduct and were “deeply concerning” due to their content.

The controversy began when screenshots of a Facebook post began circulating on social media. The post allegedly showed Coupland sharing a link to a news story about a rainbow flag being raised in St. Petersburg, Florida, accompanied by the comment: “It’s the queers they should be hanging, not the flag.” The Facebook account appeared to have been deleted by Tuesday, July 21, 2015. Coupland, who was a business professor at the college, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

According to Wiley, the college was made aware of the post by a former student who sent the post along with a complaint about its content. The college launched an investigation immediately. Coupland was placed on leave with pay on Monday, July 20, 2015, as the investigation began. Following the internal investigation, the college tweeted on Tuesday, July 21, 2015: “1 of 2: As a result of complaints about comments made on social media that were brought forward to the College, this matter was investigated internally. Mr. Coupland is no longer an employee at St. Lawrence College.” A second tweet read: “2 of 2: this matter was investigated internally. Mr. Coupland is no longer an employee at St. Lawrence College.”

Wiley said the comments do not reflect the college's values, adding, “We also believe this is an opportunity to get even better in that we are inclusive and we are supportive.” She noted that the college has strict policies that guide the conduct of its employees. The college also said it plans to expand the “Rainbow Way” — a rainbow-coloured pathway opened earlier that month at its Brockville campus to celebrate LGBT staff and students — to its other campuses in the future.

Jolisa Masucol, a student who graduated from the college in the spring of 2015, expressed disappointment that the school issued a statement on its social media channels about the incident on Monday, despite the incident first being reported by a local news outlet the previous week. Masucol, who did not take a class with Coupland but saw him in passing because he shared an office with one of her professors, said, “It reflects poorly on the school’s public relations strategy. I would have appreciated them to address the issue head on, but they didn’t.” She nonetheless noted that the college is an inclusive community.

The dismissal drew criticism from the Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), a national organization of university faculty members dedicated to the defense of academic freedom and reasoned and respectful debate. Mark Mercer, Ph.D., president of SAFS and professor and chair of the Department of Philosophy at Saint Mary’s University, wrote a letter dated July 23, 2015, to Glenn Vollebregt, president and CEO of St. Lawrence College. Mercer stated that the decision to terminate Coupland’s contract “raises serious questions about the commitment of St. Lawrence College to the goals of a liberal education.” He argued that the task of teachers is to help students think and value for themselves, and that serving that task requires members of the college community to be free to express their views as they will. Mercer wrote: “Punishing a member of the community for acts of expression is contrary to open discussion and debate and sends a message to students that they must not be candid about what they think or feel.” He added that no matter how deplorable the attitudes behind Coupland’s remark, they are best addressed through criticism and discussion, not by ruling his expression out of bounds. Mercer suggested that St. Lawrence College would have done well to organize a lecture or panel discussion on homophobia. He stated that unless it can be shown that Coupland meant his comment as a threat of violence or an incitement to violence — both of which seem unlikely on the face of it — it is inappropriate for an educational institution to take the type of action taken. Mercer concluded that if members of the St. Lawrence community can be punished for the content of what they say under the St. Lawrence code of conduct, then that code of conduct is inconsistent with academic values and sound pedagogy.

In a subsequent email dated August 9, 2015, Mercer wrote to Kelly Wiley asking for a link to St. Lawrence’s code of conduct for professors and asking what provision of the code Coupland’s posting breached. Gary Earles, Executive Director of Human Resources & Organizational Development at St. Lawrence College, responded on August 10, 2015, on behalf of Wiley, who was away. Earles stated that the media story referenced a code of conduct, but the college had stated that several policies and the Human Rights Code were considered in the investigation and final outcome of the matter. He added that the college would not be discussing the confidential employee matter any further.

On July 29, 2015, Glenn Vollebregt wrote a letter to Mercer responding to the SAFS correspondence. Vollebregt wrote that the college appreciates the concerns of SAFS and respects and takes seriously the ideals of academic freedom. However, because the matter was a personnel matter, it was dealt with confidentially, as are all personnel matters. Out of respect for that confidential process, St. Lawrence College did not intend to comment further. Vollebregt stated that the college had no issue with SAFS posting an unedited version of the correspondence on its website.