On September 23, 2020, Verushka Lieutenant-Duval, a part-time professor in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Ottawa, used the word “nigger” in full during an online lecture in her course ART 3317, Art and Gender. She was teaching queer theory and explaining the concept of “subversive resignification,” the process by which insulting words are reappropriated, emptied of their original meaning, and turned into powerful markers of identity. She gave “queer,” “cripple” through Crip theory, and the “n-word,” resignified by the Black community, as examples. According to a later account by University of Ottawa president and vice-chancellor Jacques Frémont, a student who is a person of colour emailed Lieutenant-Duval after the class to state that many students were deeply hurt and to ask that the word not be used again in class. Lieutenant-Duval apologized to the student by email and invited students to discuss the issue in the next class. One student subsequently posted the apology email on Twitter on September 30 with the caption “@uOttawa pls teach your professors to not say the n word so i don’t have to THANKS!!” The post quickly sparked outrage on social media.

Faculty of Arts Dean Kevin Kee issued a statement on October 2 saying the language was “offensive and completely unacceptable in our classrooms and on our campus,” and that the faculty was looking into the matter. The university removed Lieutenant-Duval from her teaching duties pending an investigation. Frémont later said this was an administrative suspension with pay that lasted one business day, not a disciplinary suspension. Lieutenant-Duval missed several classes and returned to teaching on October 16. The university also created a new section of the course for students who did not wish to continue with the original professor. Lieutenant-Duval later told Radio-Canada that only one student chose to remain in her class.

The controversy produced a large academic backlash. A letter signed by 579 CEGEP and university professors, written by Mathieu Gauthier of Cégep Garneau and Murielle Chapuis of Cégep Lionel-Groulx, denounced a “serious precedent which attacks academic freedom head-on.” The letter said the University of Ottawa was “on the wrong target” and that racism is not tackled “by punishing and prohibiting the teaching of words, works and authors who, on the contrary, reveal it and explicitly combat it.” A separate open letter from 34 current and retired University of Ottawa professors, published on October 16, argued that two elements had been confused in the affair: racism on campus, microaggressions, and discrimination against minorities must be denounced; and the role of university education is to nourish reflection, develop critical thinking, and allow everyone, regardless of position, the right to speak. The professors asked how, without the word, one can teach Raoul Peck’s film *I Am Not Your Negro*, the artistic movement of Négritude associated with Léopold Sédar Senghor and Aimé Césaire, Pierre Vallières’s *White Negroes of America*, Michèle Lalonde’s poem “Speak white,” the work of Toni Morrison, or Dany Laferrière’s *How to Make Love with a Nigger Without Getting Tired*. They noted that this was the third time the use and mention of words had been confused, after the cases of CBC’s Wendy Mesley and Concordia University professor Catherine Russell.

The University of Ottawa Students’ Union (UOSU) released a statement saying it was “deeply disturbed” by the open letter defending the use of racial slurs in classrooms and by a La Presse column by Isabelle Hachey that supported Lieutenant-Duval. The union called on the university to denounce the signing professors “not just through words, but through actions,” and emphasized solidarity with Black-led student groups. The statement was supported and endorsed by 20 other recognized student governments.

Rector Jacques Frémont broke his silence on October 19 with a message to the university community. He said that “members of dominant groups simply do not have the legitimacy to decide what constitutes micro-aggression.” He stated that Lieutenant-Duval had remained an employee of the university, that she was free to continue teaching while enjoying her full academic freedom, and that the creation of a new section of the course was “a necessary step to accommodate and respect the rights of all.” He also said the right to freedom of expression and the right to dignity are not contradictory but complementary.

The Society for Academic Freedom and Scholarship (SAFS), through its president Mark Mercer, wrote to Frémont asking why any action had been taken against Lieutenant-Duval, why she was not reinstated immediately, and why a new section of the course was created. The letter argued that “mentioning a word is not using it” and that “there is no slur without a slurring.” It said the complaint should have been explained to students as groundless.

The 34 signatories of the professors’ open letter then became the targets of a cyberbullying campaign. According to Le Devoir, a tweet said the teachers “supported the use of the N word in class” and added “we will cyberbully them.” Lucie Hotte, a full professor in the French department, said she received hundreds of tweets calling her racist and demanding her dismissal and “re-education.” Maxime Prévost, director of the French department, said faculty did not feel safe, especially after Lieutenant-Duval’s address was posted on social networks. Marc-François Bernier described the movement as an “ideological guerrilla” and said fundamental principles were being dropped to please customers. The Ottawa police said no complaint had been received and no investigation had been launched.

Lieutenant-Duval also spoke publicly, apologizing to the Black community and to anyone she had hurt. She said she regretted using the word and that if she had known it should not be spoken in an academic course, she would have found another way. She said the controversy had been blown out of proportion by people taking extreme positions, and she expressed fear for her personal safety because her name, phone number, and home address had been posted online. She said she was proud of young people denouncing inequalities, but was “completely stunned” that people could think of fighting racism and injustice by using hateful words.

On November 23, Frémont delivered a statement to the University of Ottawa Senate titled “correcting the record.” He said the facts had been validated by several sources: Lieutenant-Duval used the n-word; a student emailed her; the professor apologized and offered the student an opportunity to lead an in-class discussion; this generated tension, with students complaining that the request was inappropriate and that the professor had put the onus on students to educate others and argue for their right to dignity; and the class discussion became very difficult, including a statement perceived as threatening by some participants. He said the dean removed the professor pending an investigation, met with her along with her union representatives and lawyer under the APTPUO Collective Agreement, arranged equity, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) training, an EDI-led class discussion, and a separate section of the course. He also announced the dissolution of the President’s Advisory Committee on Anti-Racism and Inclusion and the launch of a new, more action-oriented Action Committee on Anti-Racism and Inclusion with a mandate to review resources, provide recommendations to further the inclusion of BIPOC members, and eliminate barriers to diversity and inclusion efforts.

However, subsequent reporting by La Presse and statements from the Association des professeurs à temps partiel de l’Université d’Ottawa (APTPUO) disputed parts of Frémont’s account. Lieutenant-Duval said that, apart from a meeting with the dean on October 6, nobody had ever asked her for her version of the facts. APTPUO said that nothing in the email exchange indicated that many students felt hurt by the word; the student in question, who is of Arab origin, wrote in her email that hearing the word “did not affect her personally,” and she thanked the professor and said she looked forward to the next class. The union also said that the Zoom recording and chat did not corroborate that the professor had made any statement that could reasonably be perceived as threatening. Lieutenant-Duval said she had retained all the emails and recordings and was calling for an independent investigation. She said she felt like the “great forgotten” person in an affair that bears her name.